When three of my close friends and I sat down to plan our next adventure, we thought it was time for something off the beaten path. With a mesmerising range of natural wonders — volcanoes, waterfalls, geysers, geothermal vents, ice caves and glaciers the size of Luxembourg, Iceland was the perfect choice. Iceland’s Ring Road is an 830-mile loop around the nation’s perimeter, allowing you to explore the entire country in one loop and that was exactly what we set out to do. It’s fairly common knowledge that Iceland is a colossally expensive country so it is not really possible to explore all it has to offer without splurging — so be prepared to dig a little deeper into your pockets for this one.
Starting off in the capital Reykjavik, we decided to sample the local bars and the food all around. They’re extremely proud of their Icelandic Hot Dogs; local yogurt and Viking Beer, so those are all recommended. The next day, we set off early in the morning to the infamous, breathakingly panoramic Hraunfossar waterfalls — the literal translation being ‘Lava Falls’. They get their name from their dazzling turquoise water, which occasionally turns white when it comes in contact with the lava.
Stepping up our already fabulous experience, we reached the Grabrok crater. The over 3000 years old crater is tourist friendly as you can brisk walk over some beautifully symmetrical steps, leading you to some unbeatable views.
Tucked away in the north of Iceland, our next stops were a series of phenomenal waterfalls — Reykjafoss, Godafoss; Dettifoss. Located in famed geothermal areas, the Reykjafoss is relatively smaller of the three. Godafoss is known as the waterfall of the Gods due to the magic of the silt-grey water from Iceland’s largest glacier. Legend has it that in the early centuries, when Christianity first came to Iceland, the lawman of the time threw all his Norse god statues into this waterfall. The largest fall, Dettifoss is the most powerful with a fall of over 100 feet. It was hard not to be taken aback by the sheer raw power of the water gushing over the edge with an almost viking fury.
A good road trip isn’t complete without food stops and so we decided to halt at the SAXA Café — known for their Herring; Rye and Rhubarb pie. 
Our next stop was one of most magnificent — the Jokulsarlon Glacier Lagoon, where huge blocks of ice break off the glacier creating magnificent icebergs which float on the lagoon. A word of caution; don’t forget to pre-book your various tours for the lagoon as they are all absolutely packed, not least because of all the Instagram-worthy images. If Iceland’s in the mood too, you maybe privy to some expansive rainbow displays across the impressive greenery.
Rather than winding down as we reached the end of our journey, we decided to be adventurous and go snorkeling in Silfra. The most astounding part was that it was in between two tectonic plates, which makes you feel like a floating phantom in an azure canyon, quite literally between worlds. The water was two degrees celsius, but don’t fret — the dry suits take care of most of it.
There was no better way to end our Icelandic summer than the epitome of luxury spas — The Blue Lagoon. The beautiful milky-blue opaque water is a stark contrast to the surrounding black lava field covered with dark green moss. The geothermal spa has everything from silica mud masks, to a handy in-spa bar, and even exclusive massage rooms. Definitely recommend the Lava Café at the lagoon — fine dining at its best. Finally, the ring road brought us right back to the start — a full circle — depositing us in the busy Reykjavik.
