I was gaping, actually gaping at a photograph of Kareena Kapoor Khan in a sharp pant suit, and wondering aloud: Do I know a sexier woman alive? I cannot say if it was the suit, or the way she carried it, blending power, pout and poise so damn beautifully. The question is, who wears the pants in their relationship? 
Pants and the gender politics around women rocking it, are part of our shared history. Ever since the first woman wore in the United States to fight for women’s voting rights, it has come to symbolise equal play, a reversal of gender dynamics. Today a woman wearing pants may not even warrant a second thought, but wearing the proverbial pants in a relationship is still something of a novelty. The traditional role of a man being the more aggressive one and the woman, the more deferential one in a relationship is changing. Experts are calling this ‘gender symmetry’ as more and more women command their level playing fields, so to say.
Look at Anushka Sharma for instance, who has championed pant suits and cropped pants on the red carpet for ever, and you perhaps get some idea of the equations of the power couple. But looks, carefully curated to make a statement, can be deceptive as well. We do not know who calls the shots in the bedroom.  
But I digress; I am talking about pants. 
The androgynous version, when teamed with just a bustier, a bralette, or a vest, a sheer shirt or a blouse that teases you with just a hint of the cleavage. It simply takes the most iconic male accoutrement and turns it into a woman’s prerogative. Makes a political statement and then traipses into a Vogue cover. It makes one wonder, why no one has ever thought of doing the same to the saree before. I am thinking of Milind Soman in a saree and nothing else. Or a mini version of it. Can we ever take it from the realm of cross dressing to making a powerful statement on gender politics?
The closest our culture took us to crossing the gender barrier is the Bengali dhoti, wrapped elegantly, almost like a saree. The ideal dhoti offers a glimpse of the legs from the back. And that has been a tricky proposition. Unfortunately for the Bengali man, his legs are his (legendary) Achilles heel.  
A Bengali man clad in a stunning peacock-fanned dhoti is best viewed from the front — like the clay idols of Kumartoli. 
In fact, George Warrington Steevens, a British journalist and writer in the late 19th century depicted Bengalis in the most denigrating ways: “By his legs you shall know the Bengali… The Bengali’s leg is either skin and bone, the same size all the way down, with knobs for knees, or else it is very fat and globular, also turning in at the knees, with round thighs like a woman’s. The Bengali’s leg is a leg of a slave.”
With due respect to all Bengali men out there, heads you win. Legs…erm….
Meanwhile, I live for the day when a man does justice to the whole nine yards. I live for the day when we will stare at his picture, misty eyed and wonder, how exciting would it be to wear the pants in this relationship.
Did you like this? Write to us at sexualitydna@gmail.com
