Actress Tanisha Mukerji’s recent trip to the USA was extra special this time. Not only was she honoured as the Grand Marshal at the Indian Independence Day Parade in San Francisco but she also extended her stay to catch up with her close friends and family as well as travel across cities. “This trip will always be close to my heart. I came back with a bunch of memories, which I will always treasure. The place is surrounded by amazing and inspiring individuals, which makes you want to visit such places again and again,” she said. Over to Tanisha for her first-hand account...
I had an amazing experience this time during my trip to the USA. For the first time, I had the opportunity to be part of the Independence Day Parade outside our country. It was overwhelming to see how Indian communities across the world have celebrated and rejoiced in our culture, connecting back to their roots. I got to travel a lot around the country and went to Seattle, LA and New York. All the places were replete with a number of great things to do.
Each place in the US has its own beauty and individuality, which is an experience in itself. I met my relatives and spent time with my cousins. My trip to Seattle was all about mountains, greenery and lakes. I also visited the first ever Starbucks in Pikes Place Market. When I think of the places that I went to during this tour, I realise I was surrounded by sheer beauty, greenery and pure nature almost all the time. People there really value their environment and look after it, which was extremely inspiring. 
The Metropolitan Museum of Art
New York is a perfect place to try a variety of things. The city surprises you every time you go there. The Big Apple was all about hanging out at the Times Square, indulging in its buzz and hustle. The opportunity of being part of the nightlife there was especially exciting and different. Also, how could one miss the lovely Central Park right in the middle of the city? I was completely in awe of the 100-acre area and wish we had something similar back home in Mumbai. 
This time, I also tried my hand at Aerial Yoga, which was quite thrilling. They have a group of well- trained experts and make sure that you learn better even without any prior knowledge about it. 
