Thanks to technology and social media, the dating world is constantly evolving and new terms are coined faster than you can believe. Here’s what you need to know to keep up with the times.
This is a peculiar way of online flirting when all someone does is tag you in relevant memes on social media or just send you memes.
This is hitting two birds with one stone. You land in a new country for a vacation or work trip, and use a dating app to find a local to take you sightseeing and date him/her too.
If you’re on a dating app, you must have come across the term in people’s profiles. It means that the person smokes marijuana or is open to smoking it and prefers dating someone who has a similar taste.
The opposite of Metrosexuals, they are the kind of men who make you go weak in the knees. They’re bearded, sport the rugged look and are sexy as hell, but alas they aren’t too keen on personal grooming.
These relationships are designed in such a way by the people involved that it not only helps them fulfill their needs but also allows them room for flexibility and change. For example, open relationships.
Playing the field by dating many people at once? Welcome to Megadating.
You matched with someone on a dating app, and then you stalk his/her social media presence, professional history, friendship circles, etc. prior to meeting them, to get an advantage over them. In short, you feel free to climb up their ladder of privacy.
This is a portmanteau of three words —  sports, porn and metrosexual. These are guys/men who go to the gym in order to share erotic images of their toned bodies on social media.
No, we’re not talking about Ice Ice Baby, Macarena or Who Let The Dogs Out. Here the term refers to someone who was a fun, short-term fling, that didn’t end on a sour note.
Most penguins species are known to be monogamous, they’re adorable and obviously look identical. Similarly, when you and your romantic interest are baes forever, and even dress identically, you’re Penguining.
Usually, a relationship can steer in two directions, one, wherein you’re wanting to spend quality time together and the other, wherein you’ve reached a point of suffocation. Is your partner constantly texting, calling and smothering you to a level where you can barely breathe? Well, then you’re being vacuum-sealed.
Not everyone’s got the gift of the gab. This happens when you’ve matched on a dating app, but the boring small talk isn’t interesting for both of you. All these nonversations lead to nowhere and fail to encourage going on a date.
This one’s quite different from Saturday Night Fever. These are Sunday night blues for singles who are most likely at home doing nothing and dread the coming week, looking for a distraction. How do you know someone’s got this fever? When he/she suddenly texts you to meet because they don’t have a date.
They say honesty is the best policy, and that’s for a reason. Breezing is when one doesn’t care about the rules of dating, playing games or gender roles when dating. The best kind of people to date, in short.
It’s when a dude looks completely different while wearing a cap or hat... And when he takes it off, it’s a not-so-good story.
One of the most annoying things that can happen on a date is when the other person is quite distracted and paying more attention to his/her phone than you. It’s time you realised that you’re officially being side-barred. 
