This year’s 70th Primetime Emmy Awards had some noteworthy beauty moments. Television’s biggest night saw actresses experimenting with various hues. Shimmery shadow added a touch of sparkle with Issa Rae showing how it’s done. The classic red pout was seen in many variations on stars like Elisabeth Moss and Sarah Paulson. Hair wasn’t left behind either with Letitia Wright accenting her elaborate hair do with crystal accessories. After Hrs lists some top trends...
A number of celebrities at the awards night colour-coordinated their eye make-up to their ensembles. Issa Rae, grabbed eyeballs for her frosty silvery blue shadow that matched her Vera Wang dress. Chrissy Metz sported a deep green smoky eye that worked with her emerald-toned one shoulder gown. Thandie Newton, meanwhile, gave her lids a wash of pink to twin with her outfit. 
Pro tip: Make-up expert Vipul Bhagat says this is a great idea for those bored of the classic smoky eye. “Play with colours to match your outfit, but be careful as to not drop the pigments on the face. Otherwise, do the eyes first and work later on the base,” he suggests.
From Elisabeth Moss to Evan Rachel Wood and Nathalie Emmanuel, each actress made the hue their own. Elisabeth went for a statement crimson pout on an otherwise clean face, while the latter two stars opted for a deeper red. Sarah Paulson sported a matte statement red lip, bold brows and fluttery lashes. 
Hair accessories had a moment at this red carpet event with a number of stars choosing them to accent their elaborate hairdos. Evan Rachel Wood wore her locks in a loose chignon with pretty handpicked flowers pinned around it. Poppy Delevigne highlighted her high ponytail with a black velvet bow. But the award for best hair belonged to  Letitia Wright who wore a braided half bun-half down look with sparkling crystal accessories. 
Pro tip: Anisha Fernandes Tavares, Senior stylist and make-up artist, Nalini of Nalini & Yasmin Salon says accessories add character to the hairstyle.  “Choose clips with glitter or beads on them. They create a classic glam look for the hair. Ribbons and bows too add a simple yet elegant touch to the look.”
One of the unlikely shades spotted here was vibrant orange. Tracee Ellis Ross went bold with her colour-blocked look, pairing a neon tangerine eyeshadow with a statement fuchsia pink lip. Mandy Moore flaunted a deep orange smoky eye, while Tatiana Maslany painted her pout in this hue keeping her skin dewy fresh.
Pro tip: Make-up expert Vipul Bhagat says coral orange works well on Indian skin tones. Just balance the colour well. “For a fresh look, add some orange eyeshadow and use a bit of lip balm for a glossy effect. Orange lip colour can bleed easily so apply it carefully with the fingertips,” he adds. 
