Nikhita Gandhi is already popular for lending her voice to Bollywood numbers such as the title song of Raabta, Dil Ullu Ka Pattha Hai (Jagga Jasoos), Ghar (Jab Harry Met Sejal) and many more. She is currently enjoying airwaves with Aao Kabhi Haveli Pe (Stree) and Dhyaanchand (Manmarziyaan) among others. But the latest from the spunky singer’s shed is her debut non-film single Humshakal. Talking about the song, Nikhita says, “It has a two-fold meaning — it’s about looking for a partner or a soulmate and since Humshakal means a doppelganger, it introduces my alter ego of an indie artiste with it. That’s why the song is special to me.”
Since Nikhita is already a known playback singer, wouldn’t it have made more sense to use her popularity instead of starting from scratch? “For me, it’s not about what people would relate to more. An artiste is never uni-dimensional and has a number of facets to them. I have other interests in the same field apart from being a singer. So, it was about portraying myself as a composer and bringing out other traits,” she says adding that this alter ego is not as a singer but an artiste. While Nikhita is aware that the number hasn’t quite broken the internet, she has had satisfactory feedback from music industry insiders for a song that she says is different from the Hindi music soundscape. “The reach has been organic. I haven’t shared it too much. The objective is not to be a hit but explore my artistry,” she points out.
Dhyaanchand is the first time Nikhita is teaming up with composer Amit Trivedi and she avers that she is excited to be a part of the album. “It’s incredible how the film has been approached through the music — it is a weird blend of super Punjabi and super hip hop sound. Intrinsically, I relate to that vibe. I also rapped on the song for the first time,” she smiles. About Aao Kabhi she says, “I jammed with Jigar Saraiya (one half of the song’s composer duo Sachin-Jigar) for this song. I got to do a desi chhori act in this item track. It’s amazing how he has applied me on this one.” 
After Dhyaanchand and her single, Nikhita hopes to rap more often. “These songs knocked on more doors of my mind,” admits the singer. She also hopes it encourages more female rap artistes to come forward. “In Indian films, women have been portrayed in a more feminine manner. But in music as well as films, there are interesting things happening as far as women are concerned,” she observes. After these releases, Nikhita has more songs in films to look forward to. “I’m also working on more singles because Humshakal got a lot of critical feedback. I’m going in the music video direction where I will be doing more experimental visuals and cause-related stuff. The track has given me confidence to not be a certain way and do what I really want to,” she confesses. Nikhita plans to release one non-film number a month and explains that it’s a lot of work since she also edits her own songs.
