At the recently-concluded London Fashion Week, model Valeria Garcia created headlines for taking to the runway wearing a breast pump. 
Having given birth to her second child in June, she used the device that works through a smartphone app to go about her motherly duties. A few months earlier at the Sports Illustrated swimsuit show, model Mara Martin created a stir for sporting a gold bikini while breastfeeding her five-month-old. Take a glance at Rihanna’s recent Savage x Fenty Fashion Show, which featured many diverse models and one noticed two heavily-pregnant ones, one of whom, Slick Woods admitted to having had contractions while walking in a barely-there one-piece suit. Closer home, it was Kareena Kapoor Khan who slayed on the ramp in a Sabyasachi creation while showing off her bump. Neha Dhupia, too, did it at the recent Lakme Fashion Week in an embroidered kurti and lehenga, representing the contemporary bride. While pregnant models on the ramp are not a norm, these women seem to be slowly breaking the convention.
Model Sucheta Sharma James, who announced her baby news in August with a cute prenatal workout video, plans to work through most of her pregnancy. She feels models walking with their baby bumps or breastfeeding on the runway creates a social awareness to not look at nursing a baby in public as taboo. She states,  “As a model, it’s an even harder task to get back to your runway figure. It’s show business and the only requirement of the field is to be the best version of yourself. So, yes, there is a pressure to get back into shape post-delivery, but I’m up for it. I walked for designer Vivek Karunakaran while pregnant. I will also be walking for Gaurang Shah mid-October,” Sucheta says, adding that designers should be open to having pregnant models on their runways. “For me, it’s inspiring to see a pregnant woman working,” she states.
(From Left to Right: Valeria Garcia flaunts a breast pump; Carol Gracias shows her baby bump; Mara Martin took to the ramp while breastfeeding)
It was Carol Gracias, a couple of years ago, who broke the norm by flaunting her belly in a sari for fashion week, while six-months pregnant. Model Alesia Raut feels it is a personal choice. It depends on whether the model can take the pressure, and the designers and presenters being fine with it. “Personally, I would love to flaunt a baby bump. It sends out a message that you don’t have to be a certain size to be on the ramp. Modelling is associated with a particular figure, so a pregnant model makes a statement,” she points out and further adds that while internationally this has been there for a     decade, in India, the trend has recently picked up.
Designer Payal Singhal, whose recent showing at the Mumbai-based fashion week featured a very pregnant Neha and husband Angad Bedi as showstoppers, her flaunting a baby bump was not an issue. “I had already spoken to Neha beforehand about the show, so when she announced her pregnancy, I didn’t change my mind. Today, more women aren’t hiding their bump. People are recognising the fact that they are working in these conditions. Showing her in a bridal outfit was not a big deal,” she reasons. She points out that when Kareena did it for Sabyasachi, it didn’t make a difference either. Clothes are meant for real women and real people.
While designer Nachiket Barve is all for inclusivity, at the same time, he feels pushing something just for creating a statement can make it gimmicky. “Taking some of the international examples, walking the runway with contractions may not be wise, that too in slippery heels. A model wearing a breast pump brings an issue into the limelight, but does it add to the show? I personally don’t have any issue working with pregnant models, it just depends on the silhouette and brief of the show,” he explains. 
Designer Shruti Sancheti, too, has mixed feelings about such fashion events. “Breastfeeding is natural, an everyday occurrence, but to do it on the ramp feels like a bit of a stunt to grab eyeballs. I am not sure what message the brand is trying to put across. Having said that, pregnancy should not limit you. Often pregnant women feel frumpy as their size changes. If they see a model walking with a bump, they may feel there is fashion for them and can look good too,” she says.
