Def Leppard’s famous track, “When love and hate collide,” perfectly summarises what foodies have been experiencing seeing vegetables they once hated as kids popping up on restaurant menus. What’s impressive is the fact that these ‘once despised veggies’ are receiving a lot of love from all quarters. From a Spinach Cannelloni, Chana and Tendli Sabzi, Beetroot, Topli Paneer Salad to Stewed Aubergine and Asparagus, chefs are giving their own spin to vegetables that never made the cut growing up. Sample what’s on offer
Tendli aka the ivy gourd is another vegetable that receives a lot of hate. However, you can’t help but leave all those unappetising moments behind, when you try Lady Baga’s Chana Tendli. The coastal preparation of black gram and tendli is tangy and cooked with scraped coconut. At: Lady Baga, Lower Parel
The Beetroot, Lal Math and Topli Paneer Salad is not only India-inspired but also made with local, seasonal and indigenous Indian ingredients shares chef partner Thomas Zacharias. Young lal math (red amaranth leaves) although mildly bitter are delicate enough to be eaten raw, and when paired with a sweet roasted beetroot puree, creamy spice-crusted Parsi Topli Paneer cheese, dark roasted almonds and marinated water chestnuts, works together. A base of sautéed lal math (cooked with cumin and green chilies almost like a sabzi) and a generous sprinkling of puffed amaranth seeds brings the dish together. Hitting two birds with one stone, you get an Indian salad and a yummy dish made with beetroot and lal math, which was not palatable to many kids at one point. At: Bombay Canteen, Lower Parel
The delicious medley of breaded chicken, warm tomato sauce, and gooey cheese seems like an Italian staple, but it actually isn’t. Not exactly anyway. Chicken Parmigiana has its origins in the United States, where it was popularised among Italian-American communities according to chef Dani. He says, “Italian immigrants created the meal, which quickly became conceived as an authentically Italian dish. Of course, it does take its inspiration from Italy. Chef Dani has given his own twist by creating a vegetarian version of this crowd favourite. Eggplants are lightly breaded, fried, topped with fresh tomato sauce and Parmesan cheese, and then baked and placed on top of the Spaghetti Arrabbiata. The seasoning brings out the flavour of the aubergine, a vegetable that is versatile and delicious and lends itself to be a work of art in an expert’s hands.” At: Mansion Bar & Lounge, Mulund
Senior sous chef, Chirag Makwana felt it would be a great idea to introduce ‘not so popular’ vegetables in their food, and that’s how the vegetable gumbo with crispy okra was born. Here it’s served with naati coriander and some brown butter rice. At: Toast & Tonic, BKC
Spinach and cottage cheese is stuffed in cannelloni (a cylindrical type of pasta) on a bed of spiced tomato fondue and cheese sauce served with fresh green salad and warm artisinal garlic bread. This Italian dish helps you finish of these often despised leafy greens. At: London Taxi, Lower Parel
Growing up the humble doodhi or bottle gourd made it from the table to our mouth only if served as a halwa. Since then it has had a renaissance of sorts, with chefs using it to make crispy fritters, in soups and even as a filling together with spinach in a tortellini. A pasta with a healthy dose of once despised veggies. Here it’s served up with truffle scented pumpkin veloute, bitter gourd crisp and spinach air. At: Verbena Brewpub & Skygarden, Lower Parel
Sous chef Swapnil Doiphode has taken a Japanese dish as inspiration to create his version of Nasu Dengaku that’s served in a grilled brinjal, quartered and stuffed with edamame with Miso Truffle flavours and a garnish of chillies, tofu topped with julienne spring onions and avocado with julienne bell peppers. Served with Dark Miso Sauce and edible flowers. A delicious twist to a traditional dish that taps into the potential of the king of vegetables and transforms it into something unique. At: Yuuka, The St Regis, Lower Parel
Looking back the king of vegetables, the good ol’ brinjal was on everyone’s hitlist for being the least favoured vegetable. Over the years, that has changed as chefs started working with this purpled hued veggie to create some lip-smacking dishes. That’s also how the Aubergine with Chicken was born. As chef Choong Chew Loon at Royal China, Delhi took it upon himself to create a dish made with a vegetable that most people hated. His dish has been a hit with many who have come around from hating this vegetable to actually being open to order it and then coming back for more. At: Royal China, Nehru Place, Delhi
Ingredients 
Method In a medium bowl, mix together flour and eggs. Stir in spinach, and season with salt and pepper to taste and paprika. Heat olive oil in a large skillet. Drop spinach mixture into the oil by the spoonful, and flatten into patties. Cook until browned on both sides. Remove to paper towels to drain. Serve warm. Recipe courtesy: After stories, Sector 29, Gurgaon, Delhi
