The dating game today is far more complex than what it used to be decades ago. And millennials have coined a term for every stage and aspect of this sphere. And who knows, you might actually identify and put a word to what’s going in your dating life. Get yourself acquainted with a plethora of words to avoid a case of FOMO (fear of missing out)...
Most of us have succumbed to doing this. Thirst Trap is to put up a sexy photograph or flirtatious message on social media, with the intention of making others to publicly profess their attraction. Done purely for ego-boosting purposes.
No, this isn’t another name for the Kiki Challenge but is inspired by the Canadian rapper. Draking refers to wallowing in sorrows caused by your romantic interest. And individuals who do that are called ‘Drakers’. For eg, Dude, it’s over a year since she dumped you. Quit Draking over her, you Draker! 
This is certainly not an honourable thing to do. Cushioning is flirting with other people whilst you’re in a relationship, so that you have a backup person in case your current relationship goes kaput.
This is the adult millennial code phrase meaning to call someone over for some action. For eg, Hey, what are you doing this weekend? Do you wanna come over and Netflix and chill?
This involves hiding the person you’re dating from your social circle and family. A major reason being, you’re just dating the person temporarily. For eg. It’s been six months since you’re dating him and he hasn’t introduced you to any of his friends or family? You’re being stashed!
It involves taking a player out of one’s dating game but the door for romance isn’t fully closed. One decides to stop pursuing the relationship for the time being. For eg, I have to prepare for my upcoming CAT exam, so I kind of had to bench him for a while.
This means leaving things up to fate, and putting off a date just in case someone better comes along.
Let’s admit, some of us are guilty of doing this at least once in our life. Fauxbaeing is to invent an imaginary girlfriend or a boyfriend on social media, so that you don’t appear like a loveless soul.
We’ve all been through this one. It’s when your love interest has read your messages but doesn’t reply. Kaboom! Sorry, you’ve been R-Bombed.
Failed to match with someone you found attractive on Tinder? A creepy way to get in touch with them would be to sneak your way to his/her Instagram account and direct message. And there you have it, Tindstagramming.
Most of us find guys with stubble or beard hot... Shaveducking is when you find the guy attractive because of his facial hair, and God forbid, if he goes clean shaven, you find him a turn off or repulsive.
It’s the new-age version of Catfishing. Here, one puts up old i.e. younger and filtered/highly edited pictures of his/herself on dating sites, and deceives others.
This means leading potential mates on a trail with flirtatious messages i.e. crumbs enough to keep them interested but never following through. For eg. I’m confused. He texts me so often but hasn’t taken me out on a date yet. I think he’s breadcrumbing me!
A gentler and kinder version of Ghosting, where you slowly reduce contact with the one you’re dating by making plans less often, gradually ignoring calls and texts.
