Designers in their winter festive offerings pushed the envelope when it came to the play of layering thus creating multiple looks, offering new perspectives to their core aesthetic and design process. Designer Urvashi Kaur, who’s always known for her smart push on overlays, let her freak flag high by teaming her tunics-pants combos with drool-worthy top coats and trench blazers. Amrich, on the other hand, layered their shibori printed separates with drool-worthy wool jackets, which had a chanderi inner lining. Chola’s energetic and un-gender inspired show sent out a manic mash-up of multiple contrasting layers which added to the drama of the runway. Rina Singh at Eka too focused on presenting her looks with an au courant styling twist — a khadi robe was worn with silk colour blocked shirt and an organza embroidered skirt overlay had a conversation with a handwoven silk organza blouson. Menswear, this season, too saw a clever dialogue between separates seen at designer Kunal Rawal’s star-studded show. Kunal’s show stood out thanks to a delightful clash between long and short silhouettes.
Clashing long and short, exaggerated with minimal — designers amplified an interplay of contrasting proportions. Anaita Shroff Adajania, Fashion Director, Vogue India says, “Designers this season played with proportions — be it the exaggerated sleeves seen at Pankaj and Nidhi and Shift by Nimish or the short and long silhouettes at the back and front at Kunal Rawal. Urvashi Kaur teamed a long blazer with sheer woven shirt which was one of the highlights. It’s nice to see a clever way of layering.”

Layering with lightweight fabrics works well for our city’s muggy weather and designers focused on comfort and wearability this season. Azmina Rahimtoola, owner Atosa observes that the layering concept works well for Mumbai. “I liked the emphasis on the lightness and sustainability. I loved Urvashi Kaur’s take on layering and also Chola, which was easily by far one of the brilliant shows when it came to experimental layers,” says she. 
Layering is the smartest way to make a guy look stylish without going overboard. Stylist Isha Bhansali says, “You’re pushing the envelope and not going overboard. Light layering and uneven hemline works for Indian market, covers up the unwanted flab and ups the style game. Designer Rajesh Pratap Singh executed layering with a sense of lightness.”
This season, designers married minimal style with functionality seen at shows like Urvashi Kaur and Three. Stylist Divyak D’Souza says, “The tone on tone layering at Urvashi Kaur’s show stood out, for example, I liked how she paired a high-neck body con dress over a voluminous maxi. It was boho luxe yet had an athleisure fit thus marrying two distinctive personalities. Naushad Ali too sent out quilted outerwear using shape and structure in one statement piece — quite a departure from his last outing, which was rather fluid.” 
