Neil Mathew draws the inference from new start-ups rising swiftly and companies tying up with financially booming companies that could potentially secure promising gains in the Indian market. This rising entrepreneur has quickly climbed the ladder, making wise decisions with each step helping him cement his spot with the elites.
"I see so many entrepreneurs making an impact today when back in the day it was believed you need to be a certain status quo in order to have a major transformation. But the times have changed and I see a generation of clever minds who are willing to bury the stereotypes and inspire growth that ripples through every fiber of the industry. I would love to invest in the Indian market when it comes to real estate, businesses, and restaurants!" he adds. 
In his early twenties, Neil found his passion in business and made the bold decision to steer from medical route to start up a luxury concierge service. He is the founder of Imperial Fleet LLC with a business partner, which turned out to be a major success. 
Being the jack of all trades that he is, he started investing in real estate properties and also went on to become the brand ambassador of 'Manor of London', a British luxury company. He says "Sitting back and going with the flow will take you nowhere. You need to throw caution to the wind and be willing to take risks."
When asked where he sees the Indian business market in the coming years, he says “I see a high demand in western influenced culture in some of the major cities in India.” Mathew believes that people are living in a society influenced by social media and the internet, and the people of India deserve to be offered the same services and products at their fingertips. 
Neil’s long-term vision will help him capitalize on a country that is rapidly growing. He views India as a growing market that has many investment opportunities which can help modernize India.
A London based sports agency, Avalon Sports Group is planning to expand into the luxury market to provide a high-end concierge service into the global market. Mathew is planning to invest in Avalon Sports Group by expanding with the two owners into there own luxury division of concierge called Avalon Diamond Club for elite members. This investment will support Neil's goal of helping sustain the growing demand of luxury services in India and United Kingdom. 
