When Justin Bieber recently serenaded lady love Hailey Baldwin outside Buckingham Palace, London, he could’ve passed off for a struggling musician wearing an oversized pink tie-and-dye hoodie with black baggy shorts and Off-White x Nike Blazer sneakers. The newly-engaged singer has been flaunting overgrown locks that he often keeps back with printed headbands, socks paired with open sandals, slouchy track pants and Hawaiian-printed shirts. Pete Davidson seems to have a similar sense of style often being snapped in graphic tees, sneakers, shorts and the likes in eye-catching yet bordering-on-ugly prints. Coined ‘Scumbro’ by Vanity Fair magazine, the term is used to describe a male, who deliberately pairs his designer labels and hip-hop brands to look more street and almost hideous. Think a clash of patterns and vivid mismatched colours.
Jonah Hill is a Scumbro, too, pairing his rainbow-hued tie-and-dye printed tee with stark white loose fitted pants and white loafers. Finishing off his look with a shiny gold watch and Polo Ralph Lauren baseball cap. Shia LaBeouf, meanwhile, is known for his fashion that gives a trashy almost downtrodden vibe. Celebrity stylist Isha Bhansali says they look like they’ve come from a flowery gutter. “In fact, I saw some memes of Justin being compared to a drug supplier to Pablo Escobar. Most Indian body types, though, can’t carry it. Someone like a Ranveer Singh has been doing it here. Diljit Dosanjh, Badshah, even Karan Johar does a subdued version of this style,” she mentions, adding it is a refreshing change, especially from the monogram look. “Indian men should set themselves free from boring dressing and embrace this trend, which is like an antithesis to the stereotypical luxe brand image,” she states.
Luxury wear has always been considered as the epitome of style and sophistication. Now, millennials are making an anti-luxury fashion statement. They’re trying to make it look more approachable and achievable. They’re making it so street and ‘downtrodden’ so that no one is intimidated by these high-end brands, opines designer Nikhil Mehra of Shantanu and Nikhil. “In this style, the more you mix and match, the more fun you can have with it. Boy George did it in ’80s as well,” he mentions, adding that design houses like Gucci and Louis Vuitton have ventured into streetwear with T-shirts, hoodies and trainers. The designer feels that this is a fad that will last for nine months to a year max. “Millenials are fast moving, they will come in, abuse and leave,” he adds.
Designer Narendra Kumar sees the Scumbro trend as a way of celebrities saying that they are bigger than the brands. “There are no set rules on how you have to wear it. They are too cool to wear head-to-toe designer wear and are moving more towards street attire,” he adds. Ask him if he thinks it will catch on in India and he’s quick to dismiss the idea. “Apart from a few people, I don’t think it will gain popularity here. One needs to be supremely confident to carry it off. Also, Indians are too worried about what other people think, and not able to stand up to someone who criticises their style.”
