It’s time to play peek-a-boo with your footwear. PVC has been popping up as a popular material choice for women’s shoes. When new mom Eva Longoria stepped out for a dinner date recently, the actress paired her monochrome shirt and denims with see-through Yeezy heels. At a charity poker tournament, Kim Kardashian West wore a cleavage-baring bodysuit and shiny high-waist pants but all eyes were on her pair of blue PVC pumps from husband Kanye West’s line. Priyanka Chopra, too, has been a fan of these Spring-Summer essentials flaunting her Gianvito Rossi PVC Heels for her television show appearances. The sheer footwear has been seen at Chanel, MM6 Maison Margiela, Christian Louboutin and Aquazurra as well. But is it here to stay?
PVC fashion from the ’60s is making a comeback this season. It has a fun and eclectic appeal. Sheer bags, hats, trench and shoes are trending. Apart from transparent and translucent PVC, aqua shades and cool-coloured ombres are doing well, says designer Rajat Tangri. “It’s offbeat and a bit futuristic. Sheer block heels and even resin platform work well. Avoid sheer straps though, as they look plain cheap and hideous and make the toes appear cramped up. I totally see them ruling our summer wardrobes. Plus, they are ultra monsoon friendly. The only problem is that repeated usage makes the plastic go more yellow and it starts looking gross,” explains the designer.
Our desi fashionistas have also warmed up to the trend. Society darling Natasha Poonawalla wore her Off-White x Jimmy Choo pair for a house party. Alia Bhatt was snapped walking the ramp at a fashion show in a red metallic cut-out dress teamed with translucent stiletto heels. “The good thing about these heels is that it can be paired with almost anything and everything. It also adds the illusion of length and is easy to maintain and clean,” opines celebrity stylist Maneka Harisinghani. She has used the shoe several times for Diana Penty during her recent film promotions. “These are great to neutralise any look, it takes the focus away from the garments which is great to balance out a busy look,” she adds.
PVC shoes have a fun vibe to them; (right) Yeezy PVC open toe mule pumps
Sheer plastic heels and boots are not just stylish but functional too especially during the monsoon. Designer Rebecca Dewan says, “They look quirky and work for a fun day look. For the evening, stick to sheer heels. One can experiment with socks, like patterned ones or coloured ones, for a fun layering option.” In between, closed plastic shoes, the type Kim regularly flaunts, had garnered much flak with doctors suggesting they cut off circulation and are a breeding ground for bacteria, but Rebecca dismisses this saying, “Wearing the material for a few hours isn’t an issue. Just make sure they are from a renowned brand.”
