The recently-concluded London Fashion Week was special for many reasons — Victoria Beckham and Mary Katratnzou completed 10 years in fashion, and designer Riccardo Tisci debuted at Burberry. It was a homecoming for Posh, who moved to the London schedule after showcasing in New York for many years and like always her unique casting of models (from ’90s pin-up sensation — Stella Tennant to the likes of Tasha Tilberg and Aymeline Valade) and her family’s unstinted support (David, Harper, Brooklyn, Cruz and Romeo) on the front row sent Insta sphere into a tizzy. Mary’s retrospective showcase drew from her incredibly rich archive comprising many of her hits — from the stamp and banknotes-inspired pieces to the Fabergé eggs and the Shalimar perfume bottlenumbers, and her vast repertoire of prints of interiors and objets d’art. Transparency, tassels, asymmetry, patch-works, pastels and shine emerged to be the key trends seen on the runways of JW Anderson, Delpozo and Simone Rocha.

Trust the Prince of pailettes to come up with the drool-worthy gender-neutral, smart and wearable separates. The show opened with an itsy-bitsy sparkly slip followed by sheer and shine-on jumpers, playsuits and dresses. Always known to pepper his pieces with cheeky messages, this time too, Ashish took a dig at the prevailing dating scene with words like — ‘Send nudes’ and ‘S&M sex and magic’ emblazoned across the covetable sweatshirts which evoked boiling point desirability. A sequinned bikini teamed with a shiny trench coat merits a mention and the closing white and sheer dress with asymmetrical hems (also water-drenched) ended the show with aplomb.  

Designer Michael Halpern has already entrenched himself as the go-to evening design name in a matter of a few seasons with his ’70s and ’80s inspired take on the groovy disco era. But this season, he showed that there was more to him than the dance of kaleidoscopic sequins. Of course, there were the Halpern signatures — halter minis, holographic shifts and metallic pants, but he proved that he’s a also winner when it comes to the non-shine colour clash. He extrapolated stripes and tartans to create some non-sparkly pieces in primary hues, which gave this outing a sense of totality. 

For her 10th anniversary outing, Posh brought home the point yet again that she’s a pro at layering — teaming her dresses with pants — a nod to the ’90s. The opening look was a tailored white pantsuit worn with a lace trimmed satin camisole, which was followed by a boxy belted red number teamed with a pair of crepe pants, which were slashed at the hem unveiling her white boots. Got to admit though that the long and lean midi-length dresses with handkerchief hems grazing the calves had a strong Celine undercurrent. However, the real winners were the jackets and trench coats, which help you make that seamless day-to-night transition. 

Chung’s line titled, Arrivals and Departures was a reflection of her own personal style and it won’t be long before her outing becomes an epic Insta rage fuelled by her fan girls across the globe. The opening look was cape trench teamed with a printed head scarf followed by a dungaree paired with a striped shirt. She also threw in cool denim separates, tailored pantsuits and glittery party dresses, which had an unmistakable AC’s stamp. A printed halter dress with Alexa’s name printed all over it stood out and so did the closing knit mini layered with a matching black topcoat. 
