A majority of people struggle with relationships. In fact, everybody does. The key to a successful marriage is to create a mission, one that will make your life with your partner most amazing. This one life we all have. Problems start when couples start taking each other for granted. On the contrary, a beautiful union begins when the couple starts to learn more about the each other.
At the cost of sounding too giving, I feel gone are the days when you could focus on what you are not getting; gone are the days when you could look for fairness and respect; gone are the days when you could show displeasure because the spouse is not doing things your way; and gone are the days to be right all the time.
What does your partner really need? What does he/she want to feel? What's their kind of security? How would they feel truly loved and cared for? What kind of a life would he/she want? Learning to hear your partner when they speak, what they mean, what their fears and worries are can help them feel supported, safe and secure. A valuable lesson to remember: If both partners cultivate this, they become invaluable to each other. If you are the husband, you must make your wife feel feminine and safe in a relationship with you. And, if you are the wife you need to nurture your man in a way which makes him feel confident about protecting you while being himself.
Making your marriage a priority and your spouse a very important part of your life should be the essence. But, people lose who they are in their marriage – they usually don't continue being who they were when their partner first fell in love with them. This causes real problems.
A man and a wife always think and behave differently. How you deal with life and problems can be different from the way your partner deals. Embracing these differences will give you the strength to create attraction.
A successful marriage is a rarity these days. What makes a good marriage lies in the couple's ability to create it together. By navigating your problems, differences, conflicts and stresses, you remain emotionally connected through a deeper understanding of each other. Don't try to have the last laugh or the last word, make your connection last.
Relationship and couples therapist. Helps couples and individuals deal with their relationship problems effectivelysagarika@thoughtcounsel.com
