One of the most loved on-screen Bollywood pairs, Alia Bhatt and Varun Dhawan, have always shared a love-hate relationship with each other. They made their film debut with Karan Johar's 2012 blockbuster 'Student Of The Year' and since then there has been no looking back for 'Varia'. 
From being called a real-life couple, admitting their possessiveness and fondness for each other, to fighting like school-kids on sets - Alia and Varun have always kept people guessing about their actual relationship. After giving us a few of Bollywood's biggest romantic hits like 'Humpty Sharma Ki Dulhania' and 'Badrinath Ki Dulhania', the power couple will be next seen in 2019 film 'Kalank'. 
While Talking about his bond with Alia in an interview with Filmfare, Varun said, "The best thing is she helps me with my character. She does all the work. She cracks my character. She also gives me references. (Laughs) Until she doesn’t do that, there’s a lot of friction on the sets. Till that doesn’t happen, I’m not happy with her. If she doesn’t act out my scenes, she’s not doing her job as a co-star."
When asked if he ever goes to Alia for any kind of relationship advice considering she has also recently started dating Ranbir Kapoor, Varun said, "No, please! I’ll not take that from her either. She’s the last person I’ll take relationship advice from. One good thing about our friendship is that we don’t discuss those aspects of our lives with each other. Our discussions are around work because both of us are equally driven about our careers. But yes most of the time, we end up making fun of each other."
In the same interview, Varun also revealed his marriage plans with long-time girlfriend Natasha Dalal. This is the first time when the actor actually went ahead and called her 'family'. "My first love is films and everyone in my life knows that. After that comes Natasha, my family, and my friends. I just don't make relationships to let go of them," he stated.
"I'm for it. I don't know when. But I'm totally for it for sure," he said when asked about marriage. 
Varun also said that nobody understands him better than Natasha. "What's special about our relationship is that I have someone, who isn't with me just because I'm an actor. It's amazing to have someone like that in your life. We bond over each other and that's the main thing. We've known each other for too long, so the connection is deep. It's like family. It's always been so," he said. 
Varun attributed his interesting film choices to her. "Actually, I decided to do a film like 'Badlapur' or 'October' because of her. It's because of her and some of our friends that I do slightly different films. They like such kind of cinema."  
