A Varansi-based start-up has designed a three-month special crash course to 'groom' potential daughters-in-law. The three-month course promises to train women, boost their communications skills and heighten their confidence.  
The course has been initiated by Young Skilled India Start-Up which is incubated with the Malviya Nav Parivartan Kendra of IIT-BHU based on demands of parents. The CEO of the start-up clarified that initiative wasn’t officially linked to IIT-BHU.
Named ‘My Daughter, My Pride’, the course was designed with Kashi-based Vanita Institute of Fashion and Designs after conducting a survey. They said they had received 'tremendous response' from the public and parents during the survey.
CEO Neeraj Srivastava told DNA: “They wanted a special course for their marriageable daughters, which could train them in a variety of skills useful for their careers as well as day to day life after marriage.”
The survey claimed that up to 75% of girls 'lacked' confidence. “Even the educated ones were struck with the fear of their future after marriage. Most of them wanted to pick up a job after tying nuptial knot to support the family. But they were not aware of how to strike a balance between the job and responsibilities back home,” pointed Srivastava.
On the basis of survey inputs, the three-month course has been specially designed for girls to train them in 'inter-personal skills, communication skills, problem-solving, stress and anxiety management, mannerism and fashion skills, computer and social media training'.
“The objective is to make them mentally prepared and train them to meet any challenges ahead by combining their education, professional and social and communication skills to deal with any situation after marriage,” he said.
“We have got huge response from parents and girls that we are screening applications to start the first batch shortly,” said Neeraj Srivastava. 
“I am a computer professional. I would love to learn a few tips the course offers on how to manage my professional and personal life,” said Akansha (22), who has enrolled in the course.
But others have raised questions about the start-up, claiming it was a money-minting business which was not in line with the vision of the government of India’s Start-Up India scheme.
Jatin Srivastava, who runs another start-up said: “It is true that businesses do cater to any legitimate demand in the market. But one has to be careful in dealing with social and public issues. Personally, I do not endorse any such project which is aimed at making money at public cost.”
