The daughter of a retired Major General working as a flight attendant with Lufthansa airlines allegedly committed suicide at her residence in South Delhi's Panchsheel Park area on Friday. Family members stated that her husband Mayank Singhvi would thrash her forcing the girl to take the extreme step. The family had last month also complained to the police about the domestic violence she was facing at home.
The victim Anissia Batra resided with her husband Mayank Singhvi in Panchsheel Park area. The couple got into a wedlock on February 23, 2016. Since the marriage was less than seven years the SDM will conduct the inquiry.
Nillum Batra (67), Anissia's mother alleged that Singhvi had not informed them about his previous marriage and the divorce. "The couple had gone to Dubai for their honeymoon a week after their wedding. On day 2 of the honeymoon he thrashed her black and blue. She was constantly messaging me and I asked her to move into another room in order to save herself. The next day she went to her friend's house from where she flew back to India," said Nillum.
The family members then asked Anissia to speak to Singhvi's parents Rajendra and Sushma Singhvi. During the conversation his parents accused Anissia of provoking her son which led to the thrashings. During the meeting Singhvi also said he would not consume alcohol which was only followed for a week. The family also alleged that Singhvi had political connection and might try to use them to hush up the matter.
Nillum's son Karan Batra said, "My father Retired Major General Ropinder Singh Batra served the nation for 40 years and after her death we were fighting for an FIR, " said Karan.
Before taking the extreme step she had texted her friends and husband stating, "I am going to take an extreme step," but before they all could reach out the news of her death came across. As per the police a labourer of the under construction building opposite their house had seen a woman coming on the terrace and then jumping off.
Nillum Batra also added that the fights kept on going on and on several occasions she and her husband had to be rushed to the Capital from their house in Chandigarh. "On June 29 we returned to Chandigarh but Singhvi would ask my daughter for money. He was divorced and needed medical help too. I had stayed with my daughter as well and on one occasion while trying to mediate he pushed me along with my daughter," said Nillum.
Neighbours also added that the couple would constantly have heated arguments and the day of the incident too there was a fight.

