Milind Soman and Ankita Konwar are now officially man and wife. The duo tied the knot in an intimate ceremony which was attended by close friends and family members at Alibaug on Sunday morning. While there were rumours that the duo has gone through a break-up, the news of their wedding were confirmed when a few pictures from their Haldi and Mehendi ceremonies made it to social media on Saturday and went viral. 
Now that the Nation's hottest crush, Milind Soman is no more single (yes, even we took a lot of time to accept and digest this fact), looks like the Twitterati is also unable to rest in peace, even after the nuptials are done. While some of the female fans couldn't help but express their envy with Ankita Konwar, for having Milind Soman for her husband, others just lamented over the fact that the 'Made in India' guy is now a married man. 
With some of the fans flooding the micro blogging site with best wishes for the newly married couple and others expressing their heartbreak, Twitter is abuzz with a varied range of reactions on Miling Soman and Ankita Konwar's wedding. 
milind soman is getting married and i'm so happy for him but simultaneously i want to curl up in my bed and cry for the next 658 years #congratulations #milindsoman #ripme pic.twitter.com/WeNq4YCffB
Another crush just got hitched Man, am I gonna die alone? Good wishes @milindrunning & @5Earthy #MilindSoman #MilindAnkitaWedding
Dekhi hai saari duniya, Japan se leke Russia. Ab ghar pe baethke roungi. #milindsoman #milindkishaadi #90sKid
Why am I watching Milind Somans wedding videos? Something terribly wrong with me though have to admit the bride & the groom look super cute. #MilindSoman
Milind Soman ki doosri shaadi ho gayee gai and it wasn’t to me 
Milind Soman is getting married 
Model Milind Soman got engaged and I know so many people who are crying.
milind soman is getting married and I can't stop crying  #heartbreaking #wishinghimlotsoflove
Always had a huge crush on Milind Soman. He’s even more sexy in person!
And the George Clooney of Bollywood and my childhood crush is now a married man to a much younger hotter woman. #MilindSoman #IMissYou #Bollywood #wedding pic.twitter.com/EXF9QVnkBf
Earlier, a few videos from the pre-wedding ceremonies of the couple had also been shared on social media. In one of the videos Miling and Ankita were seen grooving to the beats of Ban Ja Tu Meri Rani while another one had them slow dancing to Ishq Sufiyana. 
Here's wishing the newly-weds a happy married life!

