Sumeet Vyas, aka Mikesh from the popular web series Permanent Roommates is all set to tie the knot with his lady love Ekta Kaul on September 15. The actor who was recently seen playing Kareena Kapoor Khan's fiance in the film Veere Di Wedding, opened up about his love story with Ekta in a conversation with Humans of Bombay. 
The actor shared that after his divorce with his first wife, actres Shivani Tanksale, his "single" phase didn't last for too long. After meeting Ekta at shows and on sets, he didn't know how to pursue her. In fact, on their third date, he specifically told her that "It's a date" because he thought that she isn't getting it. 
Sumeet also shared why he felt Ekta was like a breath of fresh air, despite the fact that the two of them didn't have much in common. He revealed how he realised that she wasn't bothered about him being popular by the name of Mikesh. 
Sumeet also shared the incident during Holi when she ended up driving his bike and he decided that he's going to marry her. The actor said he was heartbroken when she had moved back to her hometown - Jammu and how he requested her to give them another chance. 
“I’d been single for sometime–you know that phase where your friends say, ‘you’re single, doing well, don’t get into a relationship’?–I tried but got over it quickly. Around then, I met her.. at shows & on sets, but I didn’t know how to pursue her! She tweeted about my show & we started talking–I invited her to my play & we went out after! We ended up talking for hours about acting. By the third time, I had a feeling she wasn’t getting it! So I specified, ‘This is a date okay? & she just nodded! 
She’s not from the acting circuit–she was discovered by chance. It was a breath of fresh air! I’ve been around serious artists all my life.. this was so different! Even our choices didn’t match! The first movie we watched was La la land–I came out of it emotional & she was like eh! I thought oh no–how’s this going to work? 
When we started dating, I was at sea. How do I impress her? I told her that I’m kind of famous as this character, Mikesh..She wasn’t bothered! When people asked me for photographs- she’d wonder why! The next time we met, she’d watched my entire show! I asked her how–it was so long-she said she watched it while getting ready! I was confused–Why wasn’t it affecting her! But that’s how I knew she was with me for the right reasons. It’s not one big moment when you know you’ve met ‘the one’. It’s how they make you feel everyday; if they make you a better person & she does. 
But one such moment was last year during holi! I rode my bike to a party & had a little bit of bhang. I was in no state to ride. She saw that & took the keys –I thought she was joking! I mean it was a Bullet! But she just got on & off we went, me in the backseat & my lady driving the bullet. I thought then, Man! I’m going to marry her! She’s the one! 
But, all of a sudden she left for Jammu because she realised acting wasn’t for her! I knew then that I wanted to do everything to make this work. I asked her to move back for our relationship–to give us a chance. Thankfully, she agreed, but I didn’t want to risk it, so this year on my birthday, I popped the question! She was so happy, she had a childlike smile & I swear even though I gave her a ring, it’s me who found the diamond!”
“I’d been single for sometime–you know that phase where your friends say, ‘you’re single, doing well, don’t get into a relationship’?–I tried but got over it quickly. Around then, I met her.. at shows & on sets, but I didn’t know how to pursue her! She tweeted about my show & we started talking–I invited her to my play & we went out after! We ended up talking for hours about acting. By the third time, I had a feeling she wasn’t getting it! So I specified, ‘This is a date okay? & she just nodded! She’s not from the acting circuit–she was discovered by chance. It was a breath of fresh air! I’ve been around serious artists all my life.. this was so different! Even our choices didn’t match! The first movie we watched was La la land–I came out of it emotional & she was like eh! I thought oh no–how’s this going to work? When we started dating, I was at sea. How do I impress her? I told her that I’m kind of famous as this character, Mikesh..She wasn’t bothered! When people asked me for photographs- she’d wonder why! The next time we met, she’d watched my entire show! I asked her how–it was so long-she said she watched it while getting ready! I was confused–Why wasn’t it affecting her! But that’s how I knew she was with me for the right reasons. It’s not one big moment when you know you’ve met ‘the one’. It’s how they make you feel everyday; if they make you a better person & she does. But one such moment was last year during holi! I rode my bike to a party & had a little bit of bhang. I was in no state to ride. She saw that & took the keys –I thought she was joking! I mean it was a Bullet! But she just got on & off we went, me in the backseat & my lady driving the bullet. I thought then, Man! I’m going to marry her! She’s the one! But, all of a sudden she left for Jammu because she realised acting wasn’t for her! I knew then that I wanted to do everything to make this work. I asked her to move back for our relationship–to give us a chance. Thankfully, she agreed, but I didn’t want to risk it, so this year on my birthday, I popped the question! She was so happy, she had a childlike smile & I swear even though I gave her a ring, it’s me who found the diamond!”
A post shared by  Humans of Bombay (@officialhumansofbombay) on Sep 8, 2018 at 11:14pm PDT
Those of you who're uninitiated, this would be Sumeet's second marriage. While Summet has already earned a name for himself in the industry with web shows like Permanent Roommates, TVF Tripling and his roles in films like Parched, English Vinglish, Ribbon and Veere Di Wedding, Ekta made her TV debut in the show Rab Se Sohna Isshq. The actress was last seen in the show Mere Angne Mein. 
