'Dilbar' fame Nora Fatehi, on Thursday, took to twitter to indirectly slam reports that said that she made her ex-boyfriend Angad Bedi's wife Neha Dhupia uncomfortable at a recent event with her 'angry' stares. 
For the uninitiated, Nora was rumoured to be in a steady relationship with Angad since 2016. The two had reportedly met in Goa and hit it off immediately. It's believed that they parted ways because of his closeness to Neha. He got married to Dhupia on May 10 in an intimate ceremony and the couple is now expecting their first child. 
Recently, a few reports emerged which claimed that when Nora and Neha came face to face at an event, the latter chose to walk past keeping her head down while Nora made her feel uncomfortable by giving her 'cold and hard stares'. 
However, here's Nora's side of the story - "My indifferent expression on my face in public may give 'evil vibes' but trust me at that moment I’m only thinking about whether I’m having a burger or pizza for dinner and waiting to get into my PJs. I’m living my best life. No time to stare at people at events. I’m way above that," she tweeted.
my indifferent expression on my face in public may give”evil vibes”but trust me at that moment I’m only thinking about whether im having a burger or pizza for dinner & waiting to get into my pjs. Im living my best life!No time to stare at people at eventsim way above that pic.twitter.com/fWL1wCDNXX
Earlier in an interview with Hindustan Times, when asked whether she had congratulated him on his wedding, Nora had said, “Who is Angad? I don’t even know who Angad Bedi is. I never dated him, so I don’t know what you’re talking about. I have nothing to say about his wedding since I’ve never met him and I don’t care what’s happening in his married life,” Nora had said in the interview.
It had come as a huge shocker at that time considering the number of pictures they have together with each other. Not only were they spotted at cricketer Yuvraj Singh's wedding but also celebrated Holi together. 
