Aamir Khan is one of the B-Town actors, who prefer not to put out too much of information about their personal lives in public. The actor prefers to keep his personal life private and has rarely been seen getting vocal about it. Now, a video has surfaced online in which Aamir can be seen talking about how he fell in love with his present wife Kiran Rao, much later when they'd already shot for Lagaan. He also speaks about his ex wife Reena Dutta and her active involvement in the works for Paani Foundation. 
The video, which is now going viral on social media platforms, is said to be from Aamir's interview with Chinese media. Talking about time time when he first met Kiran and how love blossomed between them, he says, "I met Kiran when I was doing Lagaan. She was one of the ADs (assistant directors) on that but at that time, we didn’t have any relationship, we were not even great friends. She was one of the people on the unit. It was after my separation and divorce after some time that I met her again."
He further shares, "In that moment of trauma, her phone came and I talked to her on the phone for half an hour. And when I put the phone down, I said, ‘My God! I feel so happy when I talk to her.’ It struck me in that instant that when I am talking to her I am so happy."
Aamir then went on to say,"Then we began dating, we began seeing each other. We lived together for a year or year and a half before we got married. I can never imagine my life without Kiran as my partner. I feel very blessed and I'm very grateful for it."
When asked if he likes strong women, Aamir agreed and said, "I like strong women - my first wife Reena and my second wife Kiran. I like people who are strong, I don't want to breask them down like women and men." He added that he feels Reena is a wonderful person as well. "Sometimes a relationship doesn't work but I  have a lot of love and respect for her. In fact, we are working together on this Paani project. She is the COO of the company. She usually runs work from the office.”

On the work front, Aamir Khan is currently busy with his upcoming film titled Thugs Of Hindostan. The movie also stars Amitabh Bachchan, Katrina Kaif and Fatima Sana Shaikh. 
