Armed criminals, in a shocking incident of highway robbery, waylaid a marriage party and shot the newly-wed bride and looted jewellery, cash and other valuables worth Rs 6 lakh on National Highway 58 in Meerut district of Uttar Pradesh.
Mohammed Shahjeb, a resident of Muzaffarnagar district, was returning home after solemnising nikah with Farhana of Nahal Village in Ghaziabad. A car started following the car and later intercepted it near MAtaur village after the wedding party had started on their journey after taking a stop at a hotel near bypass in Paratapur for dinner.
Four goons jumped out and held the newly-wed bride, groom and other relatives at gun-point and asked them to hand over the jewellery and other valuables. They shot Farhana point blank when she resisted. After this, the rest of the people in the vehicle handed over their money and jewellery and other valuables to the robbers. The robbers then dragged the injured bride's body outside as a shield to buy time to escape.
Shahzeb and his relatives then informed their other relatives who were travelling in two other cars and rushed Farhana to hospital where she was declared as brought dead.
Shahzeb later filed a complaint with the police and claimed that the robbers had looted money and jewellery worth Rs 6 lakh.
The SSP Meerut Manjil Saini and other senior officers rushed to the spot, but did not get any clues from the spot.
The Meerut police have checked CCTV footage at the hotel where the newly-wed couple and relatives dined and also all petrol pumps falling on the route, but found nothing which could lead them to the robbers.
Since all the four robbers were youth between 20 to 25 years age group, the police is also looking into love angle and personal enmity besides the highway robbery.
"We are investigating the case with all possible angles. A police team has been formed to identify and track down the criminals. We will open the case soon," claimed the SSP.
The Friday's loot and murder case has put a big question mark on the safety of the night travel on national highways in Uttar Pradesh. After the sensational Bulandshahr rape in 2016, the Uttar Pradesh Police had claimed to have tightened security at night on all national highways.
