In an incident which seems like a plot of a Bollywood film, a man in Lucknow was arrested after his wife found out that he was married to 8 other women. The man confessed to having been married thrice. 
According to a report by ANI, Afsha alleged that her husband Sameer had married 9 women and used to "jokingly" call her his seventh wife. She, however, later found out that a woman known to him was actually his wife whom he used to call his 9th wife. 
"He used to joke that I am his 7th wife. I contacted a girl known to him and came to know that he is married to her as well. She said he used to call her his 9th wife," Afsha said. 
Sameer denies the charge and says that he has been married only thrice. 
"I only had three marriages. She took my joke seriously. I have three children with 1st wife," he said after the arrest. 
Accused says, 'I only had three marriages. She took my joke seriously. I have three children with 1st wife'. Police says, 'have arrested him on written complaint of his wife in which she has mentioned only another marriage. Now she is claiming more marriages, that we will verify' pic.twitter.com/i7UoYLfVAP
According to reports, Sameer married a woman from Thakurganj in Lucknow a year ago via a matrimonial website. Sameer, a resident of Chittorgarh in Rajasthan, claimed to be a real estate businessman and was asked by woman's brothers to live in Lucknow after marriage. He agreed but used to have frequent work trips. 
Afsha, in her complaint to police, said that she was suspicious of her husband's activities. 
"My husband would often get calls from a woman called Neha. He would never let me touch his phone, but once I managed to find her number and called her. When Neha picked up, she claimed to be his cousin's wife," she was quoted as saying by ANI.
She said her husband would also transfer money to multiple bank accounts and go for long work tours.
"He used to take my car and whatever cash I had at that moment. Three days ago, I got a friend request on Facebook from a woman called Yasmeen who also claimed to be his wife and said she recently got to know about Neha," Afsha said.
Afsha and Yasmeen decided to inform the police about it on Tuesday. Afsha called the police as soon as Sameer returned home from one of his tours.
After interrogations, Sameer revealed that he was from Chittorgarh in Rajasthan.
"We have arrested him on the written complaint of his wife in which she has mentioned another marriage. Now she is claiming more marriages, that we will verify," n officer at Thakurganj police station said. 
"He says he is married to three women (only) and has three children with Neha. We are verifying the allegations made by the woman in her complaint," the officer said. 
(With inputs from ANI)
