From: Ashwina Garg<ashwinag@yahoo.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: A Place to Belong
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Suman tried to block out what Vishal was saying. A small childish part of her hoped that if she hadn't heard it, it couldn't happen. She needed a moment to reign in her chaotic emotions so she rushed into the kitchen, pretending that the vegetable curry simmering on the stove needed a stir. She checked on the rice as hot, fresh tears began to moisten her cheeks. She wished they would be done with dinner quickly. There was nothing she wanted more than to go to sleep and wake up in the morning to realize that everything that Vishal had said was a bad dream. 

Vishal was too excited about his news to notice Suman's despondency. He followed her into the kitchen, enumerating the advantages of moving to Indore. "This promotion is going to be a great opportunity, Sumi. I will leave next month and then you, Aai, Baba, Anusha and Aarav can come in April when the kids are done with school. There's no need for all of us to rush there together." He walked up to her and put an arm around her waist. "You take your time. You can slowly wind up things here and join me later." 

Suman felt like screaming. She hated it when he used affection to manipulate her. Wind up, he had said. He made it all sound so easy. Those two little words could never describe the agony of moving to another city. The anxiety of wondering if the children would get admission to a good school, the stress of packing and unpacking, the pain of resigning from her own job. Could all these be described as winding up? And those were just some of the big jobs. There were the other little things like new maids, new gas connection, new banks, ...the list was endless. Wind up. He probably thought she was one of those wind up dolls. Just turn the key and she would run around obediently, doing what she had to do. The urge to scream built up again, but she controlled herself. What would her in-laws and children think? 

She pasted a sickly smile on her face and turned. "That's sounds great Vishal. I'm so happy for you." She couldn't bring herself to meet his eyes. Her mother-in-law called out to her for her medicines and this time she was glad for the distraction. She went to her in-laws bedroom and hunted for her mother-in-law's pill box. 

"I think I need to visit the doctor again, Suman. These new pills are making me feel dizzy. Can you get me some water. I feel a little weak. It's my high blood pressure." 

"I'll get you some juice, Aai," said Suman and rushed into the kitchen again. 

Vishal was peering into the fridge. He stepped aside when Suman arrived. Suman reached inside for some juice and poured it into a glass. Only the slight tremor of her hand revealed how upset she was. 

"Just think, Sumi. In Indore, we could afford an independent house with a garden for the rent that we pay for this three bedroom apartment. You can have you're own garden and grow vegetables. With my raise, we could put the kids in that fancy school Orchids International. You could also apply for a job there." 

"Yes, but what about what I want," she wanted to say to him, but couldn't. She poured the juice and gave it to her mother-in-law. She went back into the kitchen to get the plates for dinner. "Finish up your homework quickly, Aarav. I have to set the table. We are about to have dinner." 

Vishal was still talking excitedly about their new life but Suman had finally tuned him out. 

Suman knew all about moving. They had moved four times in the nine years that they had been married. She had moved to California immediately after marriage, and she had assumed that that's where they would settle down. She had looked out for teaching jobs but quickly realized that she needed to get the teacher's training certificate to get hired by a good school. She managed to pass the exams and started work at the local public school. She had been thrilled to find out that in addition to the generous salary, she would also receive a pension for life. She had worked through a complicated pregnancy and had accumulated quite a nest egg, much to her satisfaction, until the day that Vishal's father took ill and Vishal decided it was imperative to move back to Mumbai. 

Once in Mumbai, she was determined to get back to work as soon as possible. This was her turf and she had an excellent support system in her parents and childhood friends. She approached her old school for a job and immediately started work again. The pay wasn't as great as what she had earned in dollars but she didn't mind. She was doing what she loved in the city that she loved, and things were idyllic for a while. Her father-in-law's health improved and she got pregnant with Anusha. This time she wasn't worried. She had her parents around to help her out. Her pregnancy was uneventful and she blossomed and glowed like every pregnant woman ought to, under the loving care of her parents. Then one evening, Vishal announced that he had been offered a great job with almost double his current salary in Bangalore. Once again, Suman packed all their things, submitted her resignation and moved to Bangalore. 

She hated her stay in Bangalore. Their apartment was too far from where the good schools were located so she couldn't work. Vishal said that it was too expensive to maintain two cars and unfortunately, she had handed over her savings to Vishal when they had converted their dollars to rupees. She had been too embarrassed to ask Vishal for her money back, especially now, when he earned so much more than she did and paid all the bills. In any case, maids were unreliable and she couldn't leave a seven-month old Anusha anyway, so she gave up her dream of teaching for a while. In about six months, Vishal announced that he had been transferred to Hyderabad. This was the first time that Suman was truly happy that Vishal had decided to move. She was eager to leave Bangalore and its traffic, water problems and maid problems. 

Suman loved Hyderabad. She loved going to the old city at midnight during Ramzan and Diwali and marvelled at how the Muslims burst crackers during Diwali and the Hindus feasted on Biryani during Bakrid. She loved how the waiters of a restaurant would keep an eye out for wandering children just so that their parents could eat a meal in peace. She especially loved how she could go from one end of the city to another and not be stuck in her car for more than an hour. 

She had managed to get hired as a senior school teacher of a small private school and had begun to earn well again. Her children had made friends and the weather suited Aai and Baba. Vishal had been happy with his job and so had she. Hyderabad had begun to feel like home and she finally felt like she belonged. Now Vishal had said that that was not going to happen. 

A few days later, Suman finished her lecture and was looking forward to relaxing with a cup of coffee in the teacher's lounge. Vishal had continued to wear her down with his constant talk about his promotion and she was glad to have some time to herself. She had two hours to grade some of her papers and catch up with the other teachers at the same time. The teacher's lounge at New Directions International School was the most luxurious one that Suman had ever seen. There was always a supply of cookies and muffins available along with a coffee machine. Comfortable sofas were placed near the windows where the teachers could relax and a wall with shelves served as a small library. Suman always joked that she would have worked for the school without pay just to hang out in the lounge. The school was one of those fancy new ones with the International Baccalaureate curriculum and had recently figured in the list of the top ten schools of India. 

One of the teachers from her school in California had recommended her name to the principal who was himself an expatriate and Suman was eternally grateful for this job. She taught the tenth and eleventh graders Chemistry and since it was such an expensive school, there was rarely more than twenty students in each class. It was a pleasure teaching a smaller class because she felt she could teach each student according to their level of understanding. 

Meena, the high school English teacher greeted her when she walked into the lounge. "I've got some beautiful French roast coffee powder and some hazelnut creamer from home, Suman. Just try it. It's amazing." 

"Thanks so much Meena," said Suman, making her way to the coffee pot. 

She picked up an Osmania biscuit that the school bought freshly from the famous Hyderabadi Karachi Bakery everyday. She mixed her coffee and took it to her table. She got out the mid term exam papers and began to double check the grades when a peon came and told her that the principal needed to speak to her. She was suprised to hear that because she didn't think she had done anything to warrant a trip to the principal's office. She followed the peon and knocked on the principal's door hoping that she hadn't done anything to annoy him. 

"Come in Suman. How have you been?" said Victor Monson. 

"Fine. Thank you, Sir. Srinivas said that you wanted to talk to me?" 

"Relax Suman. Take a seat. I have some good news for you. Samuel is leaving us in April to join The Oakmont School in Gurgaon so the post of Vice Principal has opened up. I wanted to discuss your long term plans here so that I need not look for a replacement from outside." 

Suman stared at Mr Monson speechless. She couldn't quite believe what she was hearing. He went on to outline her responsibilities and named a compensation package that almost matched Vishal's. It would mean working long hours and sometimes even the weekends and she wondered how she would manage with her in-laws, kids and Vishal's erratic schedule. She knew she should reveal this to Mr Monson and also inform him that she might be leaving at end of the academic year, but she just couldn't. Her lips refused to move as if they had a mind of their own. 

"You don't have to let me know immediately," said Mr Monson, seeing that Suman was having problems making a decision. "Talk to your family and let me know in a week's time." 

Suman nodded and thanked Mr Monson and left the office. She was in turmoil all day, fluctuating between excitement, nervousness, sadness and anxiety. 

That evening, she was contemplative as she pottered around the house doing her evening chores. After the kitchen had been restored to order and the kids had gone to bed, Suman entered her bedroom. Vishal was already in bed, reading a book. 

Suman changed into her night clothes and stared at herself in the mirror. "I spoke to Mr Monson today, Vishal." 

"Oh! So soon? Did you tell Mr Monson about us moving? He must have been disappointed," said Vishal, keeping his book aside. 

Suman was silent as she took a bottle of lotion and squeezed some on her hands. She took some time to make up her mind before she turned to Vishal. "I didn't tell him about moving. I got a promotion today and I have decided that we are not going to move." 

