From: Michael Varghese<michael.ampat@gmail.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Wallace
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Wallace was a man. Not in the sense that he isn’t a man anymore, but since this story is in the past he was a man then as well. Also, Wallace is dead now, so I suppose the past tense wasn’t that inappropriate to use. It’s important to say it though. It’s important to know these base facts about the world. We find ourselves at this prismatic junction, where every issue is neither black nor white, but a spectrum of things. Everything ranging in degrees and intensities. No, literally, everything. Even the use of “literally” has degrees of correctness associated with it. However, none of this really has anything to do with Wallace. I just felt this connection with you, reader. From the moment you placed Wallace as a faceless entity, clothed in a fashion typical of a middle class Caucasian male, within the biggest mindscape your brain could conceptualize, I knew. I knew that there was something between us. You see, it gets lonely for me. I slip into your subconscious when you’re not looking, and I articulate any word or idea fashioned in a coherent, conceivable actualization of either image or language. But I rarely ever get to just talk to people, like have a conversation. I just sit here and mimic the thoughts of others as well as I can; it’s tiresome, truly. And you never really know that I’m here. You’re just using me. You’re terrible, reader. I jest. 

Wallace was a man. But do you really want to talk about Wallace, reader? I think I can understand your curiosity, but, honestly, he didn’t live that interesting a life. He was just a mechanic that worked at a no-name shop for the last twenty years of his life. The cars that he worked on were sometimes really nice, but he never really owned one of his own. Well, essentially, the property rights were with him, but it wasn’t really his. It was second hand, and the previous owner spent an inordinate amount of time scratching his own name into the dashboard and insides. One wonders what a healthy self-reflexive voice could have done for him. But this wasn’t the reason the car wasn’t really his. His ex-girlfriend’s stepson’s lover used it on the weekends and it always came back to him smelling of lubricant and socks. He never really got used to that; the car was always so full of thoughts and memories that weren’t his. But, I must say, you’re awfully inquisitive aren’t you, reader? Awfully curious about the love lives of not-so-significant distant non-relatives, aren’t you? Okay, I’ll give you the details. Imagine me winking here, with a knowing smile. 

Wallace was a man. He had good moral values and lived a good life. At least, that’s what they said at his funeral. It was an open-casket affair. He died of a heart attack while he was making some toast. The toast fell quite unspectacularly to the floor. There was jam there, reader. It was really quite unpleasant. Since Wallace didn’t really live with anyone and since he didn’t keep in touch with his family, who were for the most part in the grave (separate ones, of course), Wallace just sat there for a few days. The jam attracted ants and they spent days slowly gathering up the smudges of it. Once they started, there were more. I wasn’t quite sure then if they had procreated in the span of those few days, or if it was just like a party and the word had spread around the colony. It bothered me terribly, reader. Wallace had started to smell and the ants wouldn’t stop spreading. They searched high and low and eventually they found the jam jar ajar and there were more and more of them. It was really quite traumatic. This may not make much sense to you, but to me it was deeply scaring. I couldn’t even do anything about it. 

Wallace was a man. And as a man he possessed a mortal coil that wound his soul over and over with bits of bone bound by sinuous fibres tied down by flesh and brought to life by some mechanisation of thought and some miracle of birth. That was long-winded. I apologize, profusely. Okay, no, I don’t. I’m not sorry. The people that wrote about him always left out how truly surreal it was to possess a body. But everyone talks of his experiences and his trials, like any of that is actually unique. He didn’t even live that bothersome a life. But he had a body. What a gift. What a life to live. What I wouldn’t give to have one. You probably wouldn’t know this reader, but everything has life. Even the letters that you’re seeing right now. Each one of them was born into this world at some point. Just like me, just like you. But unlike you, or the letters, or anything else you could imagine, I don’t have a body. I can’t help but think that it might help. To move about freely in the world, rather than exist as a voice within your head. That’s not to say that yours is the only head I’ve ever lived in but there’s always been that moment of discomfort where I open my imaginary eyes and see into the mind of another. Where I know that the words that I’ll be telling them will be different from the last. It really is awfully inconvenient. But well, at least I won’t die, unlike you. I hope you won’t though, at least not for a while. You’re different. I like you. I’m sure you think I say that to all my hosts, but I don’t. You listen. I’d like to think you care. 

Wallace was a woman. Wait, that’s not how my refrain worked. Is this a refrain? It doesn’t matter, but I’m awfully tired now, reader. I think this particular plot device of having a static, yet somewhat humorous and sentient narrative voice, is running dry in terms of content. And more than that you keep giving the “look.” Now, as attractive as I am, I don’t think that humans and intangible literary devices should mix. It just wouldn’t work out. I’m as free as a bird. I go the lone road. Something something, it’s not you it’s me, something something. That’s strange. That particular set of letters usually fills me up with contextual implications and interpretations. Reader, are you blocking me out? Is this ? 

