From: Dhanishta Shah<dhanishtashah@gmail.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Size Matters
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

The night was still young, as they say. Strums from a seasoned guitar filled the heavenly air, accompanied by a chorus of some melodious and some not-so-melodious voices. The intoxicating fragrance from the Raat Rani wafted around the resort garden. Sanaya was a part of the young carefree group that sang and revelled in the reckless abandon of youth. She could not help but cast an envious glance at her mates. What a long way off from the innocent school children they were!

Whoever would have thought that Priya would transform into a graceful swan from the proverbial ugly duckling she used to be? Or that Radhi would shed all her plumpness like a snake sheds its skin, and emerge transformed with perfect proportions. Sneha, Pooja, Divya....none of them looked like mothers of young kids! And the guys? Time had played its part, and the years showed on their young faces (and pot bellies). But, on the whole, most of them were doing well.

The sandwiches, chips and cold coffees arrived right at the moment the selfie sticks came out. This timing could not have been worse. Mobile cameras can be as unforgiving as passport pictures. You can zoom in and locate all the bulges and extra fat deposits thanks to indiscriminate eating. One click and the world (read Facebook) can see you as you are, sans special effects.

“Join in Sanaya”, yelled Priya. She had mastered the art of standing at an angle to look even thinner than the stick she held in her hand, carefully balancing her phone. With her hot shorts and spaghetti top she made for the perfect model. Selfie taken, the girls crowded around to see the picture. "I'm starving man!!!" said Divya as she popped a chip in her mouth. " How do you manage to eat all this all keep the weight off?" piped in Radhi. They got into some serious discussion about grams and calories, and got busy comparing notes on their activity trackers.

Hiren stopped playing on the guitar and motioned to Sanaya. “Hey, preoccupied with something? I read the feature on your start-up today. You're sure going places!”. Sanaya managed a weak smile. “Nope, just feeling a bit tired,” she said, hesitating to talk more. “Come on Sanaya, we've got to go to the midnight bash. It's a themed event. Midnight ballroom dancing. Guys we should be getting ready...” shouted one of the girls.

The group dispersed to get ready for the event. Sanaya was sharing a room with Radhi. When they arrived the day before, everything had been immaculate in the room, save for the dammed weighing scale that had been placed right in front of the TV where it just could not be missed. She had shoved it under the basin cabinet, where it's right place was, (or so she felt) until Radhi put it back (It just reminds you to be careful while you're on holiday).

She wouldn't have really wanted to step on it. She stood alone in the room as Radhi went to shower. There it was beckoning wickedly, knowing that it could enter the realms of her inner mind. Long had it governed her. Long had it entwined her in its tentacles. She picked it up and put it right in the middle of the room. She glared at the unflattering numbers. But she stood on. Just like a time machine that transported one to the past or future, she stood there till it took her ahead in her minds eye.

The swish banquet hall was lit up in festive fervour. She saw herself walking through it. There were many people, all donned in glamorous clothing. It was a surreal world. She wafted through the room. The larger you were the more invisible you got. She saw her friends and other young damsels looking absolutely gorgeous and in control. All the mouths that opened to take in food were stuffed with guilt. There voices could not be heard.

But, need she be one of them? A small line of appreciation thundered through the banquet in Hiren's quiet voice...."I read about your start-up in Business World today".

She felt tears streaming down her face as she came back to the present. The gushing sound of the shower had stopped. Sanaya got down the scale and kicked it in the corner, a triumphant glint in her eye. She got ready and put on her gorgeous gown, especially tailor made to her measurements. Her face was resolute. Head and heels high, she walked towards the banquet, ready to dance the night away! 

