From: Amritha Mohan<ammuthegreat95@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: The Vengeful Cow and Other Stories
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

He asks me why my cheek was so salty, immediately after kissing me on the cheek. I wasn’t expecting that, because it’s not every day that you get someone to sleep with you. Especially when you have this routine of crying yourself to sleep, because tears induce fatigue and heaps of sleepfulness. And especially if you desperately want that person to sleep with you. Life has this knack of not satisfying your cravings straight away. It pauses, falters, and makes you feel as if you’d die rather than bear with such unadulterated lust, such infinite desire, for your body has a mind of its own.

I wasn’t expecting him in the first place. Silently sulking on the sofa, with incessant tears dripping down from each side, I was thinking of what next to do with my life.

I had officially declared myself a failure.

The problem was that I wasn’t really used to failures. Top grades in every class, medals in every race, prizes for every contest, I was literally a teacher’s pet at school. I kept winning because it felt so good to win for the others. That was the thing about victory; once you get the taste of it, you are greedy for more. Like sex. Like salted mangoes kept in giant glass jars.

I say I’ve failed because everything that I’ve done on my own manages to complicate itself and create pandemonium. Of course, ‘on your own’ is kind of misleading because I’m well aware that nothing you’ve done is really your own- it is a product of time, history, upbringing, everything that hides behind and beneath me. But allow me to take credit for the running away from home- that was a manifestation of pure instinct. It doesn’t take a genius to figure out that you can’t ‘do your own thing’ if you are still the winner for others. You end up doing abysmally stupid things for the lust of victory, and deep inside, you realize you’ve failed. You know you’ve done nothing for yourself.

Some days, I wonder what a monster have my parents created out of me. I was just a someone who would shiver in fear, dropping whatever I was holding on to, as my mother tiptoed across the room to check what immorality I was up to- was it porn, was it one of those dirty books that perfectly fit into your large college textbooks, or was it masturbation this time? She had a hard time keeping me safe and sound, but I ended up turning unsound for her anyway. Even the psychologist, that I was forced to consult, suggested to my mother that she prohibits my visits to the library from now on, for it was obvious to her that too much reading corrupts girls.

And thus, I ran away. I wish it were as effortless as I write these words, and it may seem so even, but running away just pushed me into this phantasmagoria that I call my life these days.

I stayed at a friend’s place (let’s preserve her anonymity simply, because not everyone has to fit into the system of nomenclature) and bless her, the poor soul, she gave me ample food, money and time to figure things out. I waitressed in shabby restaurants, cleaned houses, worked in call centers and McDonald’s. I steadied myself thus, and promised myself that I’d ‘do my own thing’ later, trying hard to stop exploding with all the stories that seemed to brim within, stashing chewed words and swallowed sentences in some dark corner of my mind. And then, I immersed myself in addressing my immediate realities.

I have this weakness for fairy tales. With them, it felt as if you come home with words like you come with all your goodies from shopping. They oozed out of you like blood. Complain that I’m boasting as much as you want, but I could cook up new stories within seconds, and somehow I landed up in a job as a children’s story writer. It was easy: you only had to imagine that everything was right with this wrong, wrong world, and lo behold, the story was ready. Murders, wars, bombs, feticide, suicide, homicide- “You were prohibited to write about, or even mention these,” said my boss. Why fear when you have such diverse, bountiful characters among the flora and fauna? You just need to ascribe the vices to the wolf and virtues to the lamb. Case closed. Story ends.

 

I was as innocent as the lamb when I explained to my boss that I did nothing wrong. It seems that my recent story ‘The Vengeful Cow’, which came in our kiddy magazine Littlehood, has been the talk of the town, for apparently the wrong reasons. My boss even demanded that I apologize in public for such blasphemy. I felt like hitting his bald head against the wall; he was as stupid as he looked, and so were the people who talked about it.

It was instinct, again, that made me spit punch dialogues into his face, like the way heroines do in movies. I said that the story was the most moralistic and realistic one I’ve ever written. That kids need to face reality, not wildlife. That my sincerity is indubitable (this wasn’t true- I hated the job) and that I didn’t need his money (this wasn’t true too, but for the sake of heroinism, please pardon). Therefore, I resign.

He stared at me as if I were an ugly toad and launched his tirade. But with my records in athletics, and of course, my running history, I ran away again, quite unlike a heroine. The punch dialogues burst like pitiable balloons without serving their purpose and I had none of that jarring background music as I turned, to celebrate my dialog- delivery, like those macho ones in movies had the luxury to bask in.



Thus I was bawling all over the place- everywhere I laid, I cried. (Now don’t go all tch tch on me, because even you know crying is emotional catharsis, but you just need to do it more often.) I didn’t know what to do. I’ve failed miserably even before doing my own thing. The smell of failure nauseated me. It was palpable, inevitable, like the hanging, humid air in my room. It looked at me like a dead bat dangling from the electric lines, waiting to fall off on its own.

That’s when he emerged (let’s preserve his anonymity too. His history is impertinent with regard to the problems in my life now, and since I’m too selfish, let me bother you all with my sole story alone. I hesitate to describe him, because, chances are, you might like him better than me, which is undesirable. So, I refrain from further description. This is my story only).

 (But, it wouldn’t hurt to say that his cheeks reminded me of the remnants of volcanic eruptions, full of scars and blemishes. That his brown eyes that reminded me of foxes.

Enough of hero description, I guess).

It seems there is a big hullabaloo over ‘The Vengeful Cow’. He asked me the details, and I explained, with intermittent sobs. I said that the story was about a man who drilled holes into the nose of a cow, to let a rope inside and pull it when necessary. The cow was badly hurt and kicked the man, and the man, in turn, killed the cow and ate it. The calf saw this and plotted revenge. When the time was ripe, the calf kicked the man and killed him. Moral of story: protest against wrongdoing/ don’t drill holes through noses.

That’s all I wrote, said I.

For some alien reason, he started to laugh. Perhaps my expression seemed too pathetic to deserve any sort of consolation. Perhaps he too could sense my failure, and was rejoicing about it.



Since a woman has to have money, a room of one’s own and a partner to have sex, it happened quite naturally that day. One is incapable of thinking of sex, or satisfying your lust when one has other basic necessities to be tended to -food, clothing and shelter. Sex and love is for those who can afford to be swayed by it- a romantic writer, for instance, who glamourizes everything in their sight-poverty, depression, suicide, anything-for them, it is oxygen.

For me though, it is a hollow escape from reality. Pseudo-writers like me seek sex for solace, a last resort when all hope is lost. I indulge in it, in the hope that some great sex can obliterate dreadful thoughts and flush them into the repressed closet of the unconscious. I even begged him to offer me some love for dinner. I reeked of romanticism.

It hurts me to realize that an escape is only that, an escape. It isn’t forever, this race away from reality. I know this because by dawn, people are crowding around my place. I’ve heard stories of writers being killed for doing their own thing, and I shuddered at that thought: that I was going to get killed even before doing my own thing.

Sigh. If only.

What a shame, I thought.



All the lovemaking had exhausted me, and I was famished by morning, hungry beyond contemplation. My tummy was too tired to even growl in protest. He had left, and I had no money; I was utterly broke.

Someone kept on banging at my door.

 The manuscript of ‘The Vengeful Cow’ lay strewn across the floor. I picked them up.

It was as if I were enlightened. A sudden revelation came over me. I realized that you had to eat your own words when the situation compels you to.

Thus, I slowly chewed on ‘The Vengeful Cow’, exactly like a cow. I wished I had jam or pickle or mayonnaise for, you know, an enhanced flavor. Maybe it was the hunger that made me hallucinate, but my words did taste good. It surely has created indigestion for some though, and I rejoiced in that fact, as a death wish.

Ruminating on such thoughts, I waited for the door to bang open and the subsequent slaughter. 

