From: Himangshu Dutta<dutta.himangshu@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Destiny's Children
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

I don’t recall much from my childhood except my mother. All I know is three years before I was born, my parents had moved to the city for a better life. With time, every other face – my uncles’ and aunts’, and my grandparents’ who are long dead – has faded. Sometimes when I close my eyes to summon their faces, the memories appear blurred beyond recognition. Except when I think of my mother. Her face with a tiny red bindi on her forehead and her doting eyes looking down at me still manages to haunt my dreams. She was a beautiful woman, with high cheekbones and clear blue eyes. Growing up, I would often find strange men staring at her wherever we went. I had heard somewhere that God is in constant need of good people. That’s why he takes them away early. I realized the truth in this statement that evening when those people took away mother from me. That day we were returning from my school and were walking on the kaccha road that led to our home. Funny, how after all these years I can still remember that moment well - I was telling her about my day at school, about how I had gotten into a fight with the class bully and beaten him to pulp. It was then when they had come - in their fast car - grabbing hold of her and speeding off onto some distant horizon, further than my little feet could reach. I still remember that look of pure horror, written on her face, as she kept slipping inside into the darkness of the car. That night I cried myself to sleep, on the hard concrete of the pavement that ran alongside the road. I realize now, that that day those people had snatched away my childhood too.

In the days that followed, I begged, cried and slaved, anything and everything, to get through another day onto the evenings, when my hopeful eyes had again searched for her familiar face, among the thousands walking upon that road. But soon, the nights had descended, with mother nowhere in sight and the days after, till I finally lost count and concluded that ‘she must have had an accident and can’t come back no more, however much she wanted to.’

I grew up too soon. I had to!

The place where I now stay, the work that I do; the details are unimportant. There are thousands like me, if not more – homeless, orphaned, or worse. We could be found at busy traffic junctions, tirelessly scrubbing the already-cleaned windshield of honking cars; or selling trinkets on crowded pavements with voices that reek of desperation; or perhaps repairing old cars & buses in rundown garages with hands caked in grime, trying to scrap through a living. And in that, I am every one of them and each one is me.

Some mornings, after work, I have sat upon the dewy grass of a nearby park, too tired to sleep. At times, I have seen the early morning glisten on the cheerful faces of naughty children, walking hand in hand with their doting fathers, and I have thought of my own father. He was a truck-driver who used to ply on interstate highways at night when everyone else slept. He died in a road accident a month before I was born. ‘He never had a chance.’ was how mother had put it when she’d told me how the truck that he was driving had rammed onto the roadside divider and then toppled over, killing him instantly. I wonder now, what she meant by that statement? Did she mean ‘He never had a chance to survive the accident’ or was it meant as ‘He never had a chance at a happy life.’ Sometimes, when I think of my father, my imagination gives him many a faces that smile to me. Other times, those faces simply stare back at me, as if looking right through me, with a sad look that speaks of distances that could never be bridged.

By the time I turned seventeen, life had assumed a flow of its own, with the days and nights rolling into one another in a never-ending struggle for daily survival, with the mornings bringing with it a mirage of fresh dreams and the nights which spoke of many dreams sold short and souls corrupted, for that tiny piece of bread dipped in hunger. And it would have went on, just like that, till I had finally faded into oblivion, like thousands before and after me, if not for that one fateful night when…

 That night, we – I, with three of my closest pals – had left early for work. The previous night hadn’t been good for business. So tonight had to be special. To boost our chances, we chose the railway station for the day’s work.

The sky was overcast with dark grumbling clouds, with a hint of light drizzle falling on the skin, soaking us wet and making the railway platform where we stood slippery in turn. It was 9 p.m on the station clock and people were still streaming in onto the crowded platform, waiting for their trains to arrive and take them home. A couple of paces ahead on this platform, a lady of about thirty-five years old stood. She was looking askance, as if searching for someone or something and in her hands, was an expensive-looking travel-bag, held closely to the bosom. Just another traveler in that rush of passing feet. But call it her fate, somehow the bag caught our attention. With admirable alacrity, I then positioned myself beside her, looking as nonchalant as possible. The others positioned themselves at respectable distances from us, so they can block anyone who dared to interfere. Then it had happened, like a ghastly film rolled out in slow motion before the eyes – each act killing in its detail. The station-master had just given the signal for an incoming train over the loudspeaker, requesting everyone on the platform to ‘please step back a few paces’. The time was a quarter past nine. The rising reverberation of the incoming train’s whistle fell upon my alert ears. Sensing an opportune time, I tugged forcibly at the bag, taking the woman completely by surprise. Just when it appeared that I would get away with the bag, the lady had put up a final fight, trapping her right hand in between the leather straps. In the skirmish that ensued, I gave the lady a hard shove and the lady slipped, onto the nearby tracks, in the path of the fast approaching train. For a few seconds after that, time just froze, numbing my senses and paralyzing me with fear. That look of pure horror, written on her face, as she kept slipping away beyond the reach of my outstretched hands destined to give many a sleepless nights. Something inside my head shouted, ‘Run’ and I ran hard, away from that woman, away from my guilt. As I was about to dash through the exit gate, out of the corner of an eye, I saw a small boy of about ten - with ice cream in hand - walk up the platform. He had a pleasant sight of innocence about him that touched the heart. For a while, he just stood there, puzzled by the commotion happening around. Seconds later, as realization dawned, he gave a heart-wrenching cry of ‘Ma’ and rushed towards the tracks. By now, a crowd had gathered on the platform and the boy struggled to break through it and get to the source of that painful shriek that was his Ma’s. I looked around; all my pals had fled the scene of crime, except for me. I just stood transfixed to the ground, that small boy reminding me of another small boy from years ago, all alone on a dark road.

In the darkness of that night and in the madness of the hour, I saw everything for the first time, just the way it was. I saw another small boy from years ago, as I see him now, precariously perched upon a thankless future; as he was, as he wanted to be, and finally, as he turned out to be.

The train had passed and the small boy jumped onto the tracks, as did so many others.

But it was too late. That low moaning cry had long died. 

