From: Antara Roy Oruganti<antararoy@yahoo.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Scent of Jasmines
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

It was four in the morning. Abheer felt the darkness around him. Through the open window, a light wind blew in, and played with the curtain. It usually got colder around this time in October, but this year it was different. It felt like the heat would never leave, and the rains would never come. The rains! How he missed the rains! The rains that lashed down the roads, and slowed down everything. Everything. Even the traffic that whizzed past him everyday, as he went about his duties in the temple.

Somehow, this year, it all felt different. To start with, there were no rains, and then, it was hot, sometimes, as hot as a furnace. And, then, it was Diwali, and only a handful of lights everywhere! What happened to the dazzle and the celebrations that he had seen and enjoyed the year before?

‘Everyone has gone on vacation, looks like,’ said Kumudaksh, the head priest. ‘Well, at long last, we have a city free of pollution for a while.’

The temple was on the main road, and the pollution from the vehicles was everywhere. It gave Abheer a head ache and a runny nose ever so often. But what could he do? He belonged to a family of priests, and this was his calling. His grandfather insisted that he leave the village and find work in the city. The village! How he missed his village! The lush, green rice fields, the rides on the buffalos, the simple family home that smelt of freshly cooked rice and lentils, and most of all, of the jasmines that surrounded them on all sides. And the wide sky at night; how could he forget? Sitting by the edge of the rice fields, and staring into that rich, black night sky, dotted with the moon, and innumerable stars. As many stars as there are people in this city.

And here in the city, there were people everywhere, and above, fewer stars.

Whenever Abheer smelt jasmines, he was reminded of home. If only he could go home. If only he could get his hands to touch that earth again. If only!

Kumudaksh woke up in the other room.

‘Oh, you are up already?’ he said, stepping into the room with the window, where Abheer was sitting up on a mattress.

‘Yes, Guru, I could not get enough sleep. Could I please take leave today? I wanted to go and see the farmer’s market.’

‘You surprise me, Abheer! You really surprise me! You are not a college student, and you are not here to gallivant. You are here to read and study the scriptures with me. How will I answer your grandfather? What will I tell him? This boy is not keen to learn the scriptures? He only wants to ramble about the streets?’

‘Forgive me, Guru, but I don’t just roam around the city. It is educative to me. I see and learn a lot of things.’

‘What is educative about going to the farmer’s market?’

Abheer maintained his calm, and restrained himself from further arguing with his teacher. He knew Kumudaksh was a good man, and only a little stern.

‘All right, now, go if you want,’ said Kumudaksh.

‘Abheer wished to spring up in joy, and hold his teacher by the arms, but, he only said:

‘Your kindness, Guru.’

That day as Kumudaksh cleaned the temple, he thought of the young boy. Young and restless Abheer; did he really want to become a priest? It was his grandfather’s fervent wish that the boy dutifully learn the scriptures, and become a well known priest in a temple in the city.

It was getting worrying. Abheer’s mind was not in the scriptures, and it was not like the boy was wasting his time. He had taken a very keen interest in the garden, and ever since he came, the plants and flowers all around the temple seemed to be smiling. He had also grown carrots and tomatoes at the backyard. What was going on in the young boy’s mind?

Abheer walked to the farmer’s market, in his priest’s clothes. His long white, and spotlessly clean cotton dhoti fluttered in the wind. He loved the feel of the cloth on his young skin. Over his vest, another piece of soft white cloth hung over his shoulders. His rudraksh lightly bounced over his chest and stomach as he walked. At times, he felt, like a young priest. And at times, he felt..he felt…

The very thought made his heart thump with fear. Even to himself, he was afraid of letting out his innermost desires. It would be sacrilege. A breach of trust. What would grandfather say? It was his destiny, and he was to quietly accept it. But who had written this destiny that everyone spoke of? How come they knew what he had to do, and who he had to become?

‘It’s all written in the stars, Abheer. Don't argue with grandpa,’ his mother had said, resignedly.

Abheer looked at the traffic on the road. So many people, all in a great hurry. Where was everyone going? What were they doing with their lives? Were they also obediently following their destiny, like he was, or were they searching for another world, like he was too?

He stood as though transfixed with his thoughts, and stared at the moving cars.

‘Baba jee!’ A voice called out to him from somewhere behind him.

He looked back, and saw a young man, standing respectfully.

‘Baba jee!’ he greeted again, his palms pressed together.

Abheer almost told him he was not a Baba jee but a simple young priest who was still studying the scriptures.

‘Baba jee! I saw you in the temple the other day! You had offered me flowers. Do you remember?’

Abheer ran his eyes over the face of the youth. The bespectacled man had warm and kind eyes that shone through the glasses, and soft, gentle features that made him feel at ease.

‘Baba jee, I felt something when I saw you.’

‘Huh? What? What did you feel?’

Abheer shifted uneasily on his feet.

‘Oh, I can’t explain! I don’t know! I feel so lonely in this city. Ever since, I came away from Delhi, I felt this loneliness prick me like a needle. But when that day I saw you smile at me, while offering me the flowers, I felt some sort of joy. I just wanted to thank you. You are truly a holy priest, an angel. I see your radiance. Yes, you are God himself!’

And so saying, the stranger prostrated in front of him, and kissed his toes. Abheer pounced back, as though bitten by a snake. Just like that, a stranger had come up to him, and made him feel exalted. He did not know what it was! He felt flattered and petrified at the same time. The boy had a peculiar way of looking at him; a slow, unhurried innocence that was rare to see in a city full of people always running about in a mad frenzy. He tried to remember the face, but there were far too many who came every morning, far too many who were in a rush, too many with hurried prayers in their eyes, and mumbling lips.

The stranger was gone, but for some reason, he felt uneasy. He could not say what it was. There was a mistake here! No, he was not God, he was not a holy man! And now he remembered, that kind and warm bespectacled face. It was that morning when the jasmines that he planted had bloomed, and he was elated with the fruits of his labour. He had worked hard in the garden for many months. Whenever a flower bloomed, it filled his heart with indescribable joy. It was that joy radiating on his face, but it had nothing to do with being holy. No, he could not do this. He could not mislead that kind stranger.

He ran towards the turning the stranger had walked to, and like a mad man, looked everywhere for him.

‘I have to tell him. I have to tell him. I have to tell him.’ He mumbled to himself, like a prayer.

In his frenzy, he bumped into his teacher, but he was too engrossed with his thoughts to notice.

Kumudaksh looked at his young student, amazed.

‘Abheer! What happened? Where are you running to?’

But Abheer did not hear his teacher’ s call, and continued to run.

‘Abheer! Abheer!’ The head priest ran after him. The ash smeared on his head turned to creases of worries, trembling across his forehead.

Abheer stopped on his tracks, hot and flushed with the wild run.

‘Abheer! What has got onto you? What are you searching for?’

It was his teacher, grasping him desperately by the arms.

‘I have to tell him.’

‘Tell who what, Abheer?’

‘I have to tell that kind looking stranger that I am not a holy person. It was the look of the jasmines, that very scent of the jasmines that had made me want to smile at everyone that day. It were the jasmines. It were those flowers that bloomed after a long wait, and many hours of care and toiling. It had nothing to do with God!’

‘But, Abheer! What…what..are you talking about?’

Abheer freed himself from the clutches of his teacher, and ran into the crowd.

Kumudaksh looked after him, and wiped off the sweat from his brow. In all these years of his priestly life, he had never felt so lost, so clueless.

‘Oh, Lord Ganesha!’ he thought. ‘It is true what I suspected.’

Meanwhile, Abheer ran through the streets like a mad man, all the while, mumbling to himself, ‘I have to tell him. I need to tell him the truth. No, I cannot live this lie.’

He walked into many lanes and alleys, hoping, desperately to find that stranger again. But he saw only unfamiliar faces, faces that looked at him in amazement. He looked into small grocery shops, perhaps the stranger may have stepped into one of these to buy his everyday essentials. But no, he was nowhere to be found. Where could he have vanished? This is strange. Why was he not able to catch up with him? It had been barely a few minutes before he had realised what was making him so uneasy, and the stranger could not have gone so far!

He walked into a lane with houses on both sides. On a sudden impulse, he called out:

‘Are you there? Anywhere, here? That kind and warm looking stranger who came to me and told me that I made him so happy in the temple the other day? If you are listening, I wanted to tell you how sorry I am for misleading you. I am not a priest. I only wear these clothes to make others happy. My heart is not in prayer, and I am nowhere close to what you call as God. I smiled at you that morning because I was happy, because my jasmines had bloomed. Nothing more, nothing less! Are you here anywhere? Are you listening? I’m so very sorry to mislead you. I am no angel! I am no God! I don't understand the language of the holy scriptures. I only understand the language of flowers.’

There, he had said it, and whether someone had heard him or not; it did not matter anymore. All his pent up emotions were released now; released into the doors and windows, into houses with people he never knew.

Nothing and nobody stirred. Only a light breeze blew across the road, bringing in the scent of jasmines from somewhere. Abheer looked up; the moon appeared partially through the leaves of a Peepal tree. And through these leaves, another world beckoned to him. The world of the stars and the world of the moon, scented with Jasmines. That is where, he thought, he would truly find God.

Yes, that is where, I will truly find God. 

He turned back, and walked, gently. The wind grew stronger. The trees swayed, and leaves floated about. Somewhere in the distance, there was thunder and lightning, and finally it poured; the rain. The earth blushed to a new sweetness, and the ripeness in his heart ate into his emptiness and misery, till there was only sweetness, only the scent of jasmines.



