From: Prakruti Maniar<prakruti_maniar@yahoo.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Room 102
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

He hadn’t the time or inclination to think if his decision had been correct. His actions amounted to far less than they had during the Trials of Room 102, a job he had held since the early days of the Court and had presided over countless cases, more than he remembered. It was quieter here, despite the chaos - birds fought in the air, men fought on the ground and somewhere in the depths of the sea, amphibian life was fighting for the oxygen. Hope seemed dead, yet he felt at home.

The last few days had been a series of constant contrasts to his former life as Keeper of the Facts. To most it may seem like he was a librarian of great repute. But his job as Jury for the Great Justice was more complex and far more nuanced.

“Where is Room 102?” The eyes of a malnourished seven-year old looked up at him.

“What will you do there kid?”

“Fight for Justice. My voice is important too, you know?” He couldn’t suppress the smile at the borrowed words.

“That’s the wrong place to be if you really want justice.”

“But everyone is saying if I had enough Facts, I would be eligible for Trial. I’ll win too. Just look at my face.” At this, he burst into a chuckle.

When the kid still stood there, his face with a innocently serious determination, that’s when he began to worry. If the Outside thought that the Trials were the only way, something needed to be done. But what? His only history was that of a historian. How could he help?

That night, he did something he hadn’t done in years. He picked up a pen. That’s when he wrote his the essay, reprinted below.

--------

The House of Justice  (Written by Fugitive of the House, No. 374) 

Room 102 is unlike any place you will see in this world and a job here was the dream of my generation. Unlimited free-time and lifetime support for food and shelter, who wouldn’t want it? It was constructed when I was ten years old. I entered it at 15, as their youngest member. No one knew exactly what happened inside till you actually got there. There was no guide book, no entrance exam, no tutorial. You figured it out as you went along. 

One of the biggest misconceptions about Room 102, is that it’s a vast, open space. It’s not. It looks like one, but is only a structure made entirely of glass. The floor, the ceiling, the four walls, the chairs, the two small daises at the front, even the doors to the Outside and the Chamber of Information, which was a deep, spiraling archive of all kinds of data, are all clear glass. It looks and feels exquisite and there is nothing quite as beautiful as it. These walls will expand and contract as the capacity requires, and each wall reflects one or the other beautiful landscape from the Outside. It wasn’t until I ran way that I realised that they were deceptive; like giant, realistic paintings creating the illusion of looking into a perfect world. In all fairness, the purpose of the room had been noble - it was meant to be a sort of party for like-minded people. When it turned into an asylum where justice was distributed on an almost hourly basis, I don’t remember. 

I was a voracious reader when I came in and just the right age to go fearlessly about to discover things few others had. That’s when I opened the door to the Chamber of Information. In all fairness, it wasn’t locked, and as time passed and I became an integral, if quiet, part of the machinery, I realized that perhaps the need was for more people to come in here. 

It was an endless spiral of books and machines, storing unimaginable amounts of data, classified haphazardly. As my eyes feasted on this treasure, they also took in strange nooks between books, which shook mildly and produced a constant rapping sound. In time I found that the Issues lurked there, some silently, others so violent you’d think that they were about to bring the whole glass-house tumbling down. During my first visits down there, I assumed they were dark secrets that needed to be hidden or legendary murderers that threatened everyone.

My first day was rather uneventful. After I had prowled around enough, I came back to take a seat. Rows and rows of people sat, mumbling to each other, smiling, laughing, sulking, exchanging notes, telling each other stories, celebrating a birthday. Most people took part in a lot of these events. I wondered if they even knew each other. I sat in the quieter first row. In the first few hours, only two people gave polite, warm but controlled smiles for a couple of the celebrations. I liked that, and took my place at the lone vacant seat at the end.

Everyone was always talking here. To each other, about each other. My neighbours, those who sat to my left and behind me, spoke lesser and in quieter tones, but even they couldn’t quite stay silent. 

“I don’t think we will have another member for a while. I feel a lot of them are planning to even get Out.”  “That won’t happen. Just the other day I heard that ID No. 1254678 has invited a few guests. They will stay too, as everyone does.” 

Did I forget to mention entry here was by Invite only? When I filled out the form for permit, I was perhaps the last one to do so. 

It wasn’t long before Room 102 was filled to the brim and the walls had to be pushed farther and farther so that to my young eyes it seemed almost the entire world was within and Outside was an empty space. And with so many people, roles were assigned by the Supreme Judge. It was around the same time that justice began to be served. 

The rules of the game were simple: Sometime during the day, in the middle of the constant chatter, two seekers of justice would make an appearance on the small daises in the front. I don’t remember seeing them before, but in glass, things can camouflage easy. 

The justice-seekers eventually came to be called Issues; on some days we would talk about multiple issues, and on others, about one. The Issues would appear at what we all believed was the discretion of the Judge. I’m not sure. I know for sure that they come from the Chamber of Information, but that’s all. 

The morning of my last day was a dull one because half of us had been up all night to bring two Policies to justice. I almost always contributed to every debate. By morning, there were two other, seemingly related Issues begging for our attention. Fur and Race walked in, surrounded as usual by their own endorsers. These were called Facts, and always wore a black costumes. In time, there came some imposters, but eventually the fake ones always backed out. Not always in time, though. 

Both Fur and Race stood on the dais, their Facts ready to defend them when the time came. And just as quickly, the people were at their jobs. The Satire Brigade began with a joke that sent the hall laughing. As always, there was a camp Pro-Fur and a camp Pro-Race. They began passionately about the how to’s, and the whys and the histories of the the injustice done to them both. Then there were the Repeaters, those who parroted opinions and fats that people like me, and some others had said. The general rule wasn’t how many perspectives there were, or even how relevant they were; as long as you could talk over and over about the Issue you supported, they would win. 

My job, which I had great pride in, which turned out to be pretty useless, was to ensure that whatever was said and debated, the voices of support and the voices of dissent, and the Facts themselves, was the truth. It was easy. The moment the Issues appeared, I would glide down to the Chamber, get the relevant data and come back before the heat of the debate had started. It was always difficult to be heard above the clamor of the debates, but I hoped someone would listen and correct the course for me. That didn’t happen often, but I got to know a lot by reading. 

The ultimate Justice we dolled out so regularly was Attention. The louder the voices talking about one Issue, the higher would their respective dais rise. In the beginning, Fur had a headstart, and no sooner had it made an appearance, that he stood on a three-feet high glass column. Then someone with enough power said in a voice loud enough, 

“But Race cannot be ignored either.” And then everyone was talking, arguing, joking, debating about Race and Fur lay where it was and Race began to surge ahead, it’s column touching an impressive four-feet. And then, just as suddenly, someone said, 

“You know, Race and Fur lived peacefully before Weather,Climate and Sons decided to butt in.” 

A third Issue. 

There came crashing down both Fur and Race and were escorted out. What happened to the Issues after they left Room 102, no one knew. And I don’t think anyone cared either. They reveled in their performance during the justice process. It wasn’t unusual for Issues to simply be walking in and out, again and again, and go away because someone had decided that it was an entirely a different thing that needed their attention. 

Weather,Climate and Sons had come before. If I remember correctly, they had a record of holding our attention for a whole day. 

This time however, there was something entirely different about it. I don’t know who else saw it. I saw where they appeared from. From my point of view, it was a small cave in the wall to my left. But when the troupe, with the Company and its Facts appeared, the glass shimmered, and it looked to me that they had walked right through it, from the Outside. Not the Chamber. 

It had a larger army of Facts and when they all walked, it was like my reality was bent. For the first time in years, I looked out of my glass palace and my dream job of passing judgement. I realized once again what I had always felt; it was important to keep a track of every issue that let Room 102. At that instant, I stood up and I roared in my loudest, clearest voice,

“Listen to me everybody. Before the next trial begins, I have something to say. Look to your left. Look at me. We have spent years sitting on this glass chair, fighting battles we don’t even know exist. We cannot sit here forever. At some point, we must get dirty on the real field.” 

“Yeah, but why does that have to be us. We do our bit. Our job is to pass the Judgement mate. What do we care?” 

“Do you remember the time before you first came in? Look out now. The world was supposed to have changed by now. Those innumerable judgements, those debates, those varying sides of the same story. Just fucking look.” 

I was furious. No one said anything. No one moved. No one looked. And that’s when I ran out. Sick of their noises and sick of their tales, sick of their gossip and sick of their complaints. I needed to get out. And so I did. I didn’t know what I would do there, but it had to be something more than what I was doing here. 

------

The day after the essay, he walked to the nearest centre for a job in the local government office. It wasn’t much. It was a start. 

