From: Neha Mathrani<tesbelle@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: The National Express
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

The National Express

Ethical Journalism

OPINION

Indian Vampires A Menace: Fact or Fiction? 

by

Sheela Shah

November 2nd, 2016

As far as editorial pieces go, this might be a bit of out the ordinary for the pages of a national Indian daily. However, I find it surprising that none of my peers, or indeed representatives of the vampire rights groups have taken the time to make their voices heard on the following topic.

This election season has been resounding with thunderous national debate around one particular topic; that of vampires and their perception and position in Indian society. The middle and upper middle classes have weighed in on the issue, given the proliferation of social media. Opinions, I am forced to admit, are two a penny. However, the matter could do with some further investigation.

The first vampires allegedly came to India with the British. To be precise, it is said to have been one of the early ships of the British East India Company that landed in Hindustan with a cargo of cotton cloth and coffins. This has been repeated over and over during recent debates, and there are even Facebook and Twitter graphics doing the rounds that have attested to the same, nearly solidifying the statement as fact.

I call into question the claim that vampires arrived just before the British Raj. This is mostly due to the sheer number of foreign visitors India has had over the centuries. The region has seen vast swathes of visitors, invaders and traders, some intrigued by her wealth of culture and some just by her wealth. Long before the existence of the British East India Company, the Dutch had established what is often considered one of the world’s first multinational corporations, the Dutch East India Company. It is interesting to note that with the powers to arrest, imprison and execute those it deemed convicts it could also own land, wage war and establish and govern colonies which included the coining of money and parleying of treaties; a semi-governmental entity behind the façade of a chartered company. Thus, if the Dutch had already been at large in India at the time of the arrival of the British, why then is it popularly claimed that it was the influx of the British that led to vampires being introduced into Indian society?

Before even this, the Muslim invaders from Central Asia married their ways into the extant culture of India, resulting in an assimilated Empire. Casting the eye further into the recesses of history, we can see that Mongol invaders had been raiding India as far back as the thirteenth century. This is to say nothing of the Greeks under the formidable Alexander the Great of Macedonia (interestingly, India is famous for being the theatre of the Greek army’s mutiny against their historic king). And, before them, the possibility of Aryan invaders having settled in India is strong. Therefore, it is not a little unbelievable that foreign vampires had already been introduced to India before the advent of the British presence in the subcontinent.

But is it so impossible to think that we have not had a home-grown variety of vampire at large within the country? Why is it so necessary to equate (as has been done ad nauseum in a number of anti-vampire pieces in the lead up to the elections) the image of vampires with that of coffins? The messaging has come across loud and clear: vampires are considered a foreign invasion. And so is Christianity, if we are to believe certain ongoing rhetoric.

While much has been written on the subject of the vampire, not a great amount of effort has been invested in the reasons for their being. The modern Indian (my opponents will urge me to use the descriptor loosely) vampire is considered to be a monstrous menace and something certain politicians (lately those of the People for India Party are louder than ever) bring up time and again, to establish themselves in the consciousness of the section of the voting public firmly entrenched in the corporate sector.

 ‘Blood sucking,’ ‘soulless’ and ‘remorseless’ are the words that come up most often in conversation with anyone from the Indian corporate sector on the topic of vampires. The argument around the death penalty tips over into a frenzy when the subject of vampires is introduced. That particular section of the voting public is extremely adamant that swift and terrible punishment be meted out to these monsters. The overwhelming feeling seems to be that vampires are a species of being deserving of the worst possible treatment because of their ‘monstrous’ natures. It is of note that vampires are said to be close to immortal, their only vulnerability being fire, which burns them to ash. If they are to be given the death penalty it is by dint of the unsavoury and, yes, monstrous method of burning at the stake.

Interestingly, the same political party that holds the most stringent anti-vampire stance is also one that is accused of aiding and abetting rioters during the Mumbai fires of five years ago. However they are quick to point fingers, laying blame on the vampire population (a claim that only a few have pointed out as blatant blood-washing). While they claim that the atrocities began in those slum areas with a large vampire population, the fact remains that being notoriously vulnerable to fire, it is highly improbable that a vampire, or section of vampires, was behind the snowballing act of arson.

I reiterate the need to investigate the vampire and determine their nature, where they come from and what placed them in the position they now hold in our society and the mind of the public.

To say that India has not birthed vampires herself is to wilfully ignore a large section of the country’s population and culture. Long centuries before the activities of the European vampires in India were documented, numerous stories and folkloric tales warned of vetals and prets. While not dissimilar to the modern vampires, these creatures were not as ingrained in the public consciousness as the ones today are. They were considered to be mild nuisances and sometimes protectors amenable to appeasement via prayer.

The aspect of class was also entirely absent in the vetals of yore. While the tales do feature hero kings pitted against a wily vetal, a perusing of the texts featuring them reveals that the narratives treat both parties as equal beings, though each is ostensibly at either end of the moral spectrum. One such story features a brave and just king (who, in structuralist readings, is sometimes considered symbolic of the politicians of today) interacting with and even learning valuable lessons from a vetal. While some versions embellish the vetal’s mischievousness, the duo’s relatively civil exchange is in sharp juxtaposition to the situation as it currently stands.

The Chairman for the All India Institute of Indigenous Vampire Studies, Raveena Jaitley in a recent lecture at the London School for Economics and Political Science began her speech thusly: “The AIIIVS is the foremost organization for research into the full breadth of subjects affecting indigenous vampires today. It attracts a global reach and international intake as well as the top thinkers in the field of vampire studies. Its reputation for excellence places it as one of the leading authorities on the Indian vampire research as well as an open forum for discussions on international vampire species. ”

This seems adequate confirmation from a global authority and a prominent vampire rights activist on an international platform, that there exists such a species as the indigenous Indian vampire with international counterparts.

Why then, is the powerful People for India Party (PIP) calling into question the origin of this species? Why then are vampires being touted as a foreign import and being vilified as vandals of Indian cultural values?

When asked to comment on Miss Jaitley’s recent remarks regarding cultural dynamism, vampires and inclusiveness, made at the launch of her book A Twist of Destiny: Vampiric Voices Throughout Indian History, a senior party member had this to say: “Witches shouldn’t talk.”

While the abovementioned comment was (quite hastily) retracted, the protesting about any matter related to vampires is loud enough that enquiring minds begin to wonder at the consistency and the ferocity with which the accusations come forth. The loudest voice of them all is of its senior party leader Shri Sanjeev Shahji, who has even promised to enact strict legislation severely hampering vampire rights in India if elected.

These comments, which could have easily been written off within one of India’s blackhole-esque news cycles, were given a life of their own on the then burgeoning social media. Suddenly, they became one of the main talking points of the party, frighteningly garnering them esteem with a much larger audience otherwise uninterested in politics.

The anti-vampire reservation stance is another hot topic that has propelled said party to the front page of newspapers. The last bit of anti-vampire legislation in the country made sure that vampires have to pay three times the fees at all educational institutions. This law actively treats them as foreigners on Indian soil and as a result most vampires have been forced to work overtime to support themselves even as they study (if indeed they do choose to study, which unfortunately is becoming a burden they cannot bear) and they tend to occupy the cheapest housing, often in illegal slums. Vampires in India have always been a closely knit and oftentimes shy community. They are known to be cerebral but yet lacking in the opportunities offered to others. Does this not infringe upon the real of psychological torture?

It is intriguing to learn via the last census, that statistics show that the number of registered vampires in Maharashtra has fallen while the PIP has been in power in the state. Is the recent legislation, in fact, halting the growth of their numbers as the party so claims? One cannot be sure. However what may we deduce from the fact that the consumption of blood seems to have increased two fold in that same period as noted by The Free Internet Resource for Indian Vampire Data?

One could almost attribute the vindictive nature of this anti-vampire stance as overcompensation for some hidden agenda. But whatever could that be?

On one might call an unrelated note, it is fascinating to see that as the elections draw ever closer, an admittedly small section of the populace seems to be calling into question the candidacy of Shri Sanjeev Shahji for a reason that has been met with staunch silence from the politician himself. Otherwise ever ready to jump to his own defence, this senior party leader has refused to add his voice to the claims, though other party members have scoffed and bitterly refuted them on his behalf. Why then would the otherwise sharp (and often silver) tongued politician refuse to engage in a debate so crucial to his image? In the rhetoric that has sprung up around this particular matter the words ‘blood sucking,’ ‘soulless’ and, yes, ‘remorseless’ figure heavily. What is the implication of the implication, that the erstwhile esteemed leader might himself be harbouring a dark past? What of the whispers, that this outwardly staunch and proud Hindu, has an odd aversion to celebrating Diwali and is even said to shun the traditional lighting of lamps at inaugural ceremonies he is the Chief Guest at? These may be mere whispers, but Shri Shahji would do well to remember that there is a small percentage of the population that is still keeping an extremely watchful eye on him. A few of us still believe that his actions say much more than his words ever could.

And now, you may ask, what of the other pressing question: the Pune werewolf ‘epidemic’? But that’s a debate for another time. 

