From: Boby Mohan <mohan.boby@distilinfo.com>
Date: 7 February 2014 17:20
Subject: Submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com
*Babu* 

"Shukran Jaffer", thought Babu as he pocketed the receipt while walking out of the Western Union branch at Sabayeen, Jeddah. Sans a passport, this was a monthly ritual for Babu, it was on Jaffer's identity that the 1000 Saudi Riyals got transferred to his wife. Beg his friends to help send the money home, money that helped his wife keep the house going, money that he scrubbed floors, washed community toilets and ran personal errands to earn and save. Money his friends gave him for servitude. He has never been counted in his family back home; at least here he was the last among equals. 

It was not so long ago that he had landed at the bustling airport at Jeddah. The stark white fluorescent-lit terminal building blinded him, coming out of the relative shade within the transfer coach. Queing up in the company of scores of people like him, passport in hand waiting for the stamp to go seize their dreams, he was high on hope that the job in Gulf would guarantee a future for his family back home in Kozhikode. The family, as large as his possessions, was the biwi and his umma. In orthodox Kozhikode, it was miserable living for his wife who couldn't bear a child after 16 months of marriage when his friends were on to their second child, and what do you say for an old widow of 53 who stooped low under the load of debts her husband had bequeathed. He still didn't know for sure if it was that living he had fled to make a life of had he just run away from it all? 

His sponsor trained him well for the life that was yet to come. Squashed into a small room 8 x 8' with 3 others, he learned the art of community living. The day started much earlier than the first 'salah', or the call for prayer from the nearby mosque. Work: Wash the car, water the plants, clean the grounds around the palatial home of the fat man in a 'thop' whose picture he carried in the 'iqama' permit copy that was always on his body, they kept coming till the master came home every night and he locked the big iron gates; usually at 2 or 3 AM. With time, he came to terms with the insults, verbal as well as physical. 750 riyals that were paid in dirty notes at the end of every month redeemed all that was painful. Everyday, before sleep took over his battered soul, the words scrawled on the wall by his predecessor gave him succor; 'this too shall pass'. 

It was another backbreaking day when he heard noises from the gate; three bearded men in the green uniform were walking in, loudly arguing with his master who followed them. All he could catch was the word 'aiwa' meaning OK in Arabic and his name Babu. They gestured that he bundle up his belongings and follow them. The master had gone silent by then and retreated to being a background figure in white contrasting the menacing green foreground. With only Malayalam in his linguistic arsenal, Babu hardly knew that his dreams had just come crashing down and deportation was a few days away. 

Prison was a blur, enjoyable for the fact that there was no work to do and food was tasty; any cooked thing could trump his daily meal of kuboos with pepper on top and water to wash it down with three times a day. From the co-inmates he understood that the master might have got him in on an illegal permit and with the law catching up, Babu will be sent back home as soon as they sorted out the formalities through the embassy. Nothing really mattered now, and so it was when they came for him the next morning. He was taken to a room where a big bearded man in a green uniform slouched behind a steel table; standing against the wall was one of his cellmates. In hushed broken whispers, Babu was told that the man in green would be his new sponsor and that he was free again: the policeman's father, who was bed-ridden, needed someone to nurse him all day. He fit the bill and so a new life began. This time, it was all indoors but the stench of infected bedsores mixed with excreta made him wish for the fresh air he was granted in his old master's garden. It still was not clear when the old man died, but that morning Babu felt sad. The death left a void, his only human contact was no more and in a way he felt responsible, he cried for a lost companion. Those tears moved the fiercely patriarchal Saudi man, who mistook it for grief. Maybe it was good fortune that the old man's death had brought with it, but he set Babu free with a warning that if the immigration police ever picked him up, it was the long trudge home. Sans a work permit and the passport burnt away, Babu became 'persona non-grata' for everyone. He was not Indian anymore nor did he belong in Saudi Arabia legally. He dissolved into the sludge of immigrant humanity that every city held deep in its recesses. 

Time trained him in the fine art of avoiding the police, while he became part of a fraternal group of people from his state; those who spoke his language and went home once in a few years. He could send gifts home; bed linen, milk powder and dry fruits, and his biwi sent her love back pickled in a glass bottle with mussels and chilly; the spicy fragrance of which he indulged in during many a lonely evening lying by the kitchen counter. When can he go back to her and his umma? There too on the wall someone had scrawled, 'this too shall pass'. 

Jaffer came home early that afternoon he looked upset, so was Babu a few seconds later. His wife had called Jaffer with the news that umma was no more. His friends went into hectic confabulations therein; and Suleiman was called in to pull strings. Suleiman, traded in used goods, and had a few good friends in the immigration department, whose daily tipple he arranged through the trucking channels from UAE. Saudi Arabia had very strong prohibition laws and consumption of alcohol was a capital offense; it also had an official culture of 'vaasta' or favours from people in high places. Thanks to strong influence of alcohol, in 24 hours, called in favours ensured that Babu was on the Air India jet leaving for Kozhikode. 

Setting foot on his home soil felt quite normal, unlike the stories he had heard where men have broken down getting back home after years of bondage abroad. He loaded the few packages filled with all that were his, stuff squirrelled away over years as gifts for his biwi and for his yet-to-be-built home. A fake handbag, bottles of oud attar and eyeliners and lipstick thrown away by his masters' wives were meant to make up for the many years of solitude his biwi had to endure. In death as in life, his umma had done him good; how else would he have got home. He was happy, understandably so for a man coming home but not quite for someone returning to his mother's funeral. 

There was shock on her face; the biwi had not expected this. She has nothing to say as he walked in to the now pucca house. He was happy to see the money sent monthly had helped them make the hut a house; there were signs of comfortable living seen in the three small rooms: Electric lights, a TV, comfortable beds and the kitchen which looked neat and clean. Now he knew where the pickled mussels came from; and in many years Babu felt content. Maybe all these years of labour were worth the pain, his family lived in comfort, his umma died happy the tea tasted extra sweet to his parched tongue. 

That evening, after dinner sitting at the threshold of his home, looking out to the rice fields that lay beyond, he barely heard his biwi ask - "when are you going back, Babukka?" 

Warmly, 

Boby Mohan JEO & Head Of Business +91.984.032.6296 mohan.boby@distilinfo.com 

My calendar: https://mohanboby.youcanbook.me/ 

www.distilinfo.com http://www.youtube.com/user/distilinfo 