From: sashikanta mishra <sashikantain@yahoo.com>
Date: 21 June 2013 20:08
Subject: SUBMISSION 
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>

*THE PROP* 
*Sashikanta Mishra* 

A narrow streak of sunlight steals through the window to wake up Madhusudan alias Madhu Sahoo, as he lies on his cot alone. Sleep departs, but a simmering rage takes its place as his eyes fall on the walking stick resting against the wall. It's the seventh day of his confinement! 

Madhu Sahoo is six feet tall with a sturdy physique to match. Like the monkey-King Bali, his mere sight reduces his opponent's strength by half. His raucous laughter creates flutters even in the bravest of hearts. When Madhu Sahoo moves through the dusty lanes of Subaleswar village, it strikes all and sundry with an awe, usually reserved for mightier beasts like the elephant. No wonder - none ever steps onto his wrong side. The number of prospective fights with Madhu Sahoo being reduced to mere walk-overs during his heydays, is legion. Alas! None has matched his prowess in lording over fellow humans so far. He is the undisputed leader, the headman of the village since as far back as memory goes and, in no mood to abdicate as yet, not even after his seventh day of confinement. But times are changing, they say. 

He becomes conscious of the day - it's *Makar Sankranti* and his seventy-fifth birthday. He is livid, not so much for the freak accident he met while walking on the paddy fields the other day, but for the shoddy treatment meted out by the 'boy' - his very own son, Mahavir - fifty years old and a father of three. Just a few decades ago, and the boy would have borne the brunt of a thrashing, meant only for obstinate cattle, for his silent impunity. After all, sore knees do not disable a one-man-army! The fool had better understand. Alright, so he's had a fall on the field. He'd stumbled upon a rock in the fields to land his entire weight on both knees. Since then, he's unable to walk. The fools insist it was due to his dimming vision. How pathetic! He feels sorry for *their* opacity of vision. He grows mad at his son all the same. Offering a prop to the mighty father is impunity indeed, though of a subtler kind. Madhu Sahoo fumes as he casts contemptuous glances at the far end of his room, where the wretched walking stick announces its uncouth presence, resting against the wall. The ugliness of it matches the acute poverty of his son's intellect. Its curvy head bows down before his might in profound apology, he notes with some satisfaction though. The stick had belonged to his own father, long since dead, he recollects with ire and rues his inadvertence for not cremating it with the old man. He also rues for not noticing the stealthy existence of this useless memento in the basement for all these years. Madhu Sahoo gets up in rage, but falls back to the bed, holding on to his knees. A seething pain courses up his limbs in protest. He allows the storm to subside and tries to clear the cobwebs of his mind. He decides with unerring clarity, to snuff out the life of the shameless appendage, somehow. It is effrontery at its worst, he curses aloud at his son's tomfoolery. 

Come forenoon, and the villagers arrive to inquire. "Grandfather, it's sad to see you lying thus, on your birthday," Sumanta Jena, the upstart and aspiring headman, taunts. "Ah! The Bhima of Subaleswar confined to bed.....it's unimaginable....yet it's true...alas! who can deter fate?" Kartik Rout rubs salt to the wounds. "Better get the Mahasugandha Taila of Purna Kaviraj. It had worked wonders with my grandfather. The old man used to gallop around like a horse even at eighty," Tikina Pradhan sprinkles a few drops of poison to the hateful broth. Madhu Sahoo hears their prattle, fuming within but, without a word on lips. He knows, he's cornered. Eventually, the visitors leave, but not without spiking him further. 

The tiger lies in chains! They think he's a ripened fruit, ready to drop off. Ha! What wishful thinking. He recalls the memories they'd forgotten..... The climbing up the tall palms in one go, the swimming across the half mile wide river underwater, the breaking open of a raw coconut with a single fist blow....and the wrestling bouts.....the sheer agility and swiftness of the leg tackle to down the opponent.........the long shot of football from one goal post to another.....they've forgotten it all. He curses them again. All this, to select a new headman, he sees through their game-plan and clenches his teeth. They had come to tell him, he's grown old. They had come to ask him to abdicate in favour of fresh blood. What blood, he asks. It's like adulterated milk, without power or vigour! The tiger doesn't grow old. He simply matures. But he rules all the same. Staying indoors for a week doesn't mean anything. He promises to get back to action, soon enough to nip the growing buds! 

He hollers at the stupid boy. "Just break the stick and throw it, burn it, bury it...do whatever you want..just get it out of my sight," he commands. The fifty year old boy remains unmoved. What impudence! "You'll need it to walk once your pain subsides," the boy answers calmly and leaves the room. "I'll never need it, you hear?" he shouts behind the boy. The boy has the temerity to throw a challenge, the giant observes with ire! He'll soon see the end of it, the father promises himself. 

He calls for Dinu, the servant, to stealthily get the magic oil from the Kaviraj. Dinu gets the stuff and massages the master's knees. But his son sees the act. "At this age, the quack's oil won't work. Let us see a doctor in the town, tomorrow," he says. The lid's blown off, causing the giant to be peeved further. But he puts his foot down. "What? Have you gone mad? Has the unholy hand of a doctor ever defiled my body in these seventy-five years.....," he just about stifles the urge to add that it would be so for the next twenty-five. The boy departs with a smile on his lips. 

His daughter-in-law brings food and attempts to feed him. What shame! But he's unable to squat on the floor. She makes him sit on the cot. He tries to shoo her away but she's in no mood to budge. Finally, he gives in, irritated but helpless at her steely resolve. He sits up on the cot, like an obedient child before his mother, while she drapes a towel around him. The bib tied securely, she forces him to open his mouth and feeds him. He can't eat without spilling, they say. It would lessen her burden.....ugh! He curses the dead old woman as he gulps down the insipid stuff. It was only a few years before that he could devour almost half a goat with a matching heap of finely cooked rice. The old woman could certainly cook a delicacy to his order. But now,....they feed him some bland stuff made of vegetables only. It'll reduce his bowel movement, they say. He grimaces in disgust. 

The sun's gone down the horizon. He feels the call and calls out Dinu. The rascal's nowhere to be seen. The boy enters the room holding the bedpan. The father glares at the ungodly contraption. "I'm not going to use it, mind you!" he barks at him as he'd done for the past week. "Well, if you can squat, then I'll call Dinu and others to take you to the toilet," the boy answers as he'd answered for the past week. He squirms at his son's niggardliness. "I wont do it before you," he yells, causing the boy to leave instantly. But he returns with Dinu and leaves again. Dinu keeps the bedpan in place and waits silently by the side. The master completes the routine. Dinu cleans the rear with a wet cloth and leaves with the bedpan. The giant casts furtive glances at the door. Nobody has seen, he surmises gratefully. But he feels better all the same. 

He dreams of his father - the old man with the walking stick, bent by the double - tottering around the house - *thuk-thuk-thuk*! He wakes up with a start. A gust of cool breeze flows in along with the moonlight. He's had enough, he decides. He strains his eyes in the shadowy light to make out the hazy silhouette of the stick. It's still resting on the wall unabashedly, its head bent in perpetual supplication alright. But still he senses its silent taunt. It's his best chance, he realizes, to smash it to pieces. The pain's all but gone. Slowly, he gets up and tries to move, holding the edge of the cot. He takes a deep breath and slithers up to a distance. The stick's at an arm's length, he observes. He attempts to stand up without support. He manages but only momentarily, for, the pain returns, with a vengeance. It causes him to totter about like a drunkard and finally, his huge bulk tilts. He gropes around wildly for support and just about finds the wall. He stands with his arms pressed to the wall. The stick's standing just below his arms. Within reach but still far away! He looks around - the cot's at a distance now. Undecided, he leans onto the wall. The pain subsides eventually. So, he takes a hand off the wall. But he's unable to swivel his bulk to return to the cot. His mind works up to a frenzy. He tries to sit, but the pain threatens. The sky lights up faintly in the meantime, he observes through the window. He stands plastered to the wall like a lizard in wait for its prey. Just then the boy enters into the room but stops dead in his tracks at the sight. An eternity passes. Finally, Madhu Sahoo breaks into a smile at the boy and lets go the wall....to place a hand on the curvy head of the stick. Life returns! He takes the walk back to the cot - *thuk, thuk, thuk*! "Thought, father in heaven would be sad if I had it thrown away," he explains to the boy. The boy understands. You can take me to the doctor in town," he commands the boy. The boy understands this too. He tells the same story to the villagers. They understand too. They throng at his house in numbers. He tells them of his decision to abdicate in favour of younger blood. There's more rejoicing among the villagers as he agrees to be around as their advisor. 

He's happy that they've realized, he's indispensable after all as he takes a walk around the house - *thuk-thuk-thuk*! 

