From: ANGupte <angupte@gmail.com>
Date: 26 August 2013 01:00
Subject: SUBMISSION
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

*The Long Dark Onsite* 

It was a fine day till the knocking began. 

It wasnt a normal knock,no.It was a loud series of knocks ,violent and insistent ,the kind that comes when the rent is long overdue.I switched on the lights, walked over to the peephole and saw Stefan. 

He looked distraught and slightly disheveled standing against the white snow. 

Most people in the software industry here in India will tell you that "onsite" rocks, "onsite" makes you rich and onsite gives you (hopefully) a nice wife back home through the reflected glory of a first-world country. 

For the uninitiated,onsite in IT parlance means going abroad and working at a client's office for a few months or a year.You get paid in dollars,buy some nice Adidas sneakers and come back about 10 kilos heavier from all the bread and sausages you eat. 

Somewhere along the line there , you gain a new appreciation for stuff like clean air, clean water and a lack of anarchy.The ones that get used to all that stuff settle down and get twangy foreign accents, the ones that dont ,come home and buy a flat in Jayanagar, Bangalore. 

But Im getting ahead of myself here, this is after all my onsite story and unlike other cool companies ,my company sent me to a small town in Germany, Mulhiem ,to be precise. 

Climate :Cold and Wet. 

Color :Grey. 

People: Nonexistent. 

That was Mulhiem ,Germany and a more gloomier , greyer ,darker town you could not imagine. 

It was an ancient communist era town , full of steelworks and iron factories , all shuttered now and most of the young people had long since moved to the bright lights in the big cities of Berlin or Frankfurt. 

The remaining dregs ,consisting of retired steel and coal workers would shuffle along in the rain and gloom and buy state Lotto tickets and break into periodic riots whenever Bayern lost against Munich. 

I was put up in an ancient wooden house by the canal, overlooking a neat garden full of porcelain garden gnomes,which looked quite jolly when the sun came out but suitably sad when it rained,which was more often than not. 

I had not understood this Teutonic obsession with garden gnomes,all styled like Santa's elves with twinkling eyes, round bellies ,smiling bearded faces and wearing a red elf cap.They seemed to be the only ray of sunshine in an otherwise dreary town . 

"Fucking garden gnomes and bleach.Thats what we Germans love, no wonder we went apeshit and killed all the Jews here." 

Stefan was a fellow programmer with a good taste filter missing and an enthusiastic Communist.He had seen both ideologies clash during the cold war and his chosen religion perished which left him feeling slightly conflicted. 

"Communism died like a mad dog in the desert.That fucking baldy Gorbachev, didnt have the balls to carry on what Papa Marx started." 

He used to take the daily indignities of aprogramming job personally and after one caffeine fueled bug fixing night in the office ,stuck to me like glue.At least you know how to code, unlike half the snotfaced programmers here who couldnt program a fucking Fisherprice toy." 

Tall,lanky with a charming smile ,most people took him at surface value and warmed to him until he opened his mouth and the ranting began.I once watched him take apart a skin head by the simple expedient of stomping his "Death to Jews " sign to pieces ,all the while smiling warmly at him. 

Life at UberTech ,where we both worked was on the whole, depressing since we were engaged in the highly intellectual job of making a fish inventory system for a Tuna canning company in Poland. 

"Fucking hate Tuna anyways, big Godammn eyes and tastes like fucking wet cat.",Stefan would snarl during breaks.After some time he would just snarl "Fucking tuna " and later on just "Tuna" but with so much hatred that quite a few tuna bodies turned in their tinned graves. 

Except for Hiedi , who was our supervisor we rarely saw anyone else outside the development team and even her sunny disposition was taking a beating with Stefan's relentless nihilism and my indifference. We used to go for beer after work sometimes where Stefan and I broke down her happy view on life into something more manageable ,and finally drove her to bitch about her fiancee's mother which was quite funny to hear ,as I always used to think that horrific mother-in-laws were a unique Indian entity.After a few beers we dissed Ubertech,capitalism in general and Hiedi's soon to be mother-in-law in equal parts. 

Some nights I would go to my balcony ,slightly buzzed on cheap German beer and could make out ,in the gloom the serried ranks of gnomes smiling at me as if to say "Cheer up,brother!Heigh Ho Heigh ho!" 

If I had drunk too much though ,I would half close my eyes and wave to them imagining them also waving back, my captive band of brothers in Arse End ,Germany. 

And so the weeks passed. 

It had been a tough Wednesday,as Wednesdays are wont to do and all three of us were celebrating rather hard.Stefan had long since passed the line of coherence.To the point where he couldnt even say "Tuna" anymore but just pull a popeyed fish-eyed face ,rather like a Tuna. Hiedi and I laughed ourselves silly that night and Stefan's face set permanently into the fish face as the night progressed. 

Heidi was looking better and better as the beers worked their magic, but as things go, Stefan passed out and she drove him home.I should have known then. 

I staggered home in the rain, its gentle cold working its way into my jacket and dampening the buzz which had been building since the evening.I felt for my keys in the silence of the hallway and almost tripped and fell over something.I switched on the hallway light and stared blearily down at something shining brightly on the floor.It was a garden gnome ,all pristine green and white and smiling under the harsh fluorescent light.I stared at him a long time  before taking him with me into the house and falling into a deep dreamless sleep. 

The next day , when I woke up the gnome was on a pillow next to my head.I felt too hungover to move so we looked at each other balefully for a few minutes until a rising tide of bile forced me to go to the bathroom and throw up. 

The next day , when I came home, there was another garden gnome waiting for me outside the door and me ,being slightly drunk again picked him and screamed at the windows of my neighbors 

"Enough!Enough with the gnomes!You made your point!" 

The neighbor's lights didnt go on, I guess they were used to drunks in that town and I took the gnome in and chucked him onto the dining table. 

The day after that there were two grinning gnomes waiting for me outside my door and by now I simply took them in without thinking.Days passed ,and the gnomes steadily multiplied in my house till I had gnomes peeking out from every nook and corner ,including the bathroom, loft and the hall.I ran out of space in my bedroom so I started putting them under my bed. 

Work had become more hectic as the software we had built got deployed and we were busy clearing bugs and sending fresh builds to the canning factory.My onsite got extended by a few months, but by now I had forgotten how home looked like. 

The gnomes in the garden below ,meanwhile , had increased in number.To my eye ,it looked like a few hundred had been added , as if some clarion call had been sent out and my house was the promised land.They had taken on a slightly sinister look now and didnt look so jolly anymore as they stared upwards at me. 

"Im doing my best!" I would howl at them in the rain,"What more do you want!??" 

They still stared at me without changing their expression. 

Time went on and the gnomes in the house kept increasing, what was once a trickle had become a flood 

and after sometime I just left the new gnomes in the hallway until they lined up all the way down the hallway upto the road. 

I became withdrawn at work and Stefan and Hiedi kept trying to cheer me up ,l but I turned away from them .Hiedi had broken up with her boyfriend and was going around with Stefan , so they had entered their own little universe now,one in which I wasnt welcome anymore.They gave up trying after sometime and the trips to the pub stopped soon after. 

I didnt care.I had the gnomes to talk to every day and at least they were better company than Stefan and Hiedi.I used to see them in the pub we would frequent sometimes, sitting warm and cozy inside as I watched them outside from the dark road. 

Night used to fall increasingly early, sometimes by four in the evening until winter came and one fine day I woke to find the whole town was covered in snow.I walked to my balcony and looked down at the garden and the gnomes were all covered with snow,not even a rosy cheek showing as the snowflakes gently fell. 

The world seemed right after a long time as I closed my eyes and took a deep breath of fresh air.I was jerked from my reverie by a heavy pounding noise. 

I went to the front door where the knocking was coming for and looked through the peephole. 

There stood Stefan , looking disheveled and tired ,standing against the white snow. 

It had been quite some time since he had seen me last and he walked into my house without saying a word. 

He took in the gnomes lying everywhere dully and turned towards me "Heidi is missing for the last two days.Have you seen her anywhere?"I mumbled something but he wasnt listening ,he walked sightlessly past me out into the snow and disappeared into the white. 

The police came soon after, but I had cleared up my mess by then. 

My onsite ended next week and I came home.I bought a house in Bangalore with a garden, and a Santro ,color puce. 

It rains much less in Bangalore ,and the sun is out almost everyday. 

I sit out there several times a week and think of what I once was and what I once did. 

The garden of my house is nice and big and Ive filled them with some of my friends from Germany but no matter where I put them,they just look sad and out of place. 