From: Amitava Dutta <ads.hobbit@gmail.com>
Date: 8 December 2013 11:31
Subject: SUBMISSION
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com
Bio: Amitava Dutta, born on 22nd July, 1981 has a passion for photography, reading, travelling and writing. His short stories mostly deal with sensitivities of the relationships, the battle of conscious vs. subconscious and he likes to take his readers through the alleys of vivid narration. 

Psychedelic Symphony 

The news came late afternoon. I had failed to clear a couple of papers and hence needed to be deported to the institute to successfully complete the course to catch that invaluable degree. Such is the problem with an easy life, once you are used to it you never want to come out of it. All the new hire orientation, fancy power points and company policies looked greek but seemed nice. At times my head used to get heavy, but controlled itself in no time while slowly coming down over the chest. There was a dhaba in the corner of the road, the menu card and that glass of tea worth 5 rupees seemed more familiar to me than how advanced analytics can change the world. I was sipping my second glass of tea and the call came from Kolkata. My attempt to enter into the world of freedom came to an abrupt halt. I was cursing myself, Campus placement and everything seemed like never happened ! The moment of self awakening was soon replaced by fear; what now ? 

I packed my bags and started for Kolkata. The exit was embarrassing, people looked sad but laughed behind. World doesn't show mercy to the losers and yes, I was a loser. The usual scenes outside the train window seemed to be running backwards to a wrong direction; it wasn't homecoming and my all senses could feel it. The train finally stopped, the station was crowded as usual. Busy, Anxious faces everywhere; someone came to the station to send off their near ones. I was walking slowly, head slightly bend in the front, eyes on my footsteps. I didn't want to face my parents; I was overburdened with myself and jumped to a bus heading towards the Institute. 

It was a cloudy day and the next semester season hadn't started yet. None were present at the campus, the sprawling hostel more resembled like a haunted house. I searched corner to corner for a living creature. I was sweating, the backpack was getting heavier. I sat on the dusty stairs, moments passed, a very feeble hindi music was coming from somewhere. Was someone there ? In hope I was heading towards the music. It was coming from some room. I knocked twice, and the music stopped. After couple of minutes, I heard the latch getting opened from inside. 

I didn't expect Tarun. Tarun's situation was exactly like me. He was one year senior to me and was a return soldier who had retired hurt. A full year passed and bagged the degree as well; but this time could not clear the hurdle to get a job. And since then he was at the campus, hiding himself. He laughed at me first, and then there was a shadow covered his face, which he couldn't hide even when he was laughing. I put my bag aside and sat down on the wooden chair. It cranked a bit and I started explaining my situation. It started raining outside, the world was getting under the water and two half dead souls sitting in a near dark room, getting more anxious about their future. 

"How's your girlfriend doing ?" he tried to change the topic to break the monotone. 

She left me long time back. She asked for time, wanted to get some fresh air or I was getting stinky. My ego could not say the truth, "She is doing fine" I said and I knew she was. 

I never imagined Tarun to have a girlfriend; affairs to him was a wastage of time. Tarun was matured and I was approaching my maturity through learning it in the hard way. 

I coughed a bit to clear my throat and said finally, "Can I stay in the room next to you ?" Tarun was staying in one of the double rooms conjoined by a toilet. I wanted to conceal myself from the world. 

Tarun had no problem, or better to say he had no say in me being his neighbour. He was too busy with himself and didn't really care about the world outside. 

It was getting darker outside and I was getting tired. I decided to move to my newfound room and arrange my bed. The room was vacated only a week back and was left with a wooden cot and a small cupboard. I found a bed cover from my backpack and spread it over the cot. I was fast loosing conscious and the eyelids were getting heavier every moment. 

And then she came for the first time. In the faded light her face was in the shadow. Her long locks cascading like a black curtain was over her shoulders. She moved towards me in a calculated move. I had never seen her before; I had questions on my face. She sat beside me, sighed a little bit and in a soft tone started : "Bijon, I have lost myself. " I didn't know how to react; a flux of emotions were building inside me; and I didn't know how to vent them out. I asked "who are you ?" She smiled a bit but didn't say anything. I desperately needed to smoke and out of curtsy offered a cigarette to her, she lit it up, puffed a little smoke and her eyes were fixed on me. Both remained silent; when the filter started burning I realised that I should talk. "What do you want from me ?" "Everything" She replied. Don't know why, I felt like knowing her for ages. A very strong sense of attraction was building inside me. I wanted to touch her hands. 

I lost her when I woke up in the morning. I couldn't even recall her face. It was late and I could hear the outside world running fast. The theory of relativity made the corner of my eyes moist. I started to hate the world. The rest of the day sounded like the monotone of a jammed recored. A few known faces, half smile and then some less than half sympathies. I was shrinking inside me and wanted to returned to my island. 

"Let's go out today !" Tarun said with a faint smile. "Our good old Tea Joint ? And Then another failed attempt to time travel !" I said with indifference "Let me take you somewhere else" He was still smiling 

Late evening we devoured the bylanes of the old Calcutta streets through a bottle of country liquor. It came cheap from a near dark corner of a by lane where we had to prove ourselves as genuine pursuer of the nector. It didn't taste nector like at first and my food pipe was on fire; It was my first time. After some time it was easy, the burning sensation long gone and everything was like a faded dream. We came back in a trance. The stairs in the semi dark ghostly hostel was looking poetic. My legs refused to drag me up to the room and we sat there, like two ghostly souls, on the dust and mosquitos and a few rats may be; I was feeling sleepy. 

Her long locks brushed on my face. I didn't seem to have any weight and was in a floating state I was happy to see her back. I asked "Where have you been ? The whole day I had waited for you" She smiled, looked at my eyes. Something was there in that look; it was piercing me. I was feeling breathless. 

"You are dying, Bijon" She said quietly and I was actually glad to hear her voice finally. "Why ?" I asked reluctantly. "What will you do without me ?" She laughed. I smiled finally "I don't even know who you are !" 

And then all of a sudden my mouth filled up with some warm liquid. I was distracted by that strange liquid in a wrong time, I had to know whom she really was. I tried to talk, tried really hard. 

I don't remember anything after that. I was laying on the stairs. Couldn't find Tarun nearby. Could realise that I threw it up last night, there were some flies on it and the whole place was stinking. My head was heavy and lungs were filled with dust. I was walking slowly towards my room, opened the door, was glad to see the bed at the same place I had expected it to be and thrashed myself onto it. I had slept like a log the whole day. I didn't have much work though. The classes were yet to start and I still didn't inform my parents about my fall from the garden of eden. I was having a bit trouble in breathing; the inhaler was somewhere inside my backpack. And I had lost all my energies even to fetch that, I remained laid on my bed, the whole day and night. 

The next morning was bright. I woke up in time, took shower and headed for the institute. I was determined to pass this time. I had to collect all the right books from the libraries. Had lunch in the canteen and came back with a pile of books. Started flipping through a couple of pages, all my early excitements were gone to see the same old chapters, the theories, their lemmas and the name of the mathematicians who had brought change to the world. I tried to shake off the disgust and went to the tea stall by the road, just like those days. There I sit and observe people, there movements, ring of the cycle bells, someone comes back from the office, a few children coming back from the tuition. The busy lane seemed like a great river of humanity and I kept observing. Don't remember how long I sat there, the guy at the tea stall needed the empty glass to be cleaned up. 

Her perfume was strong and she was making me nervous. I tried to hold her hand but couldn't move as if I was pinned to the bed. Her face was very close to me; and she spoke in a whispering tone "Help me, Bijon.." There was a strong sense of desire inside. The strange feeling of struggling to understand someone behind the mist. And then I kissed her, she was biting my lips. Could taste my blood coming out and there was restlessness. Her eyes were fixed on me. There was no air left on my lungs. She let me to settle down; said : 

"You were looking for me, weren't you ?" I said nothing. "Will you come with me ? And we will float over and around the world !" And temptations made me weak. I was worried about degrees and job at the same time. So at the end I didn't say anything; just stared at her, dumbstruck. 

And she continued "You are running on a treadmill !" "Just running, reaching nowhere. You don't even know who you are !" 

Do I know who I am ? The lady was right. They said I am different. Didn't have any friends, didn't have any network, I was on my island slowly floating away from the mainland. 

Some strange chemistry was brewing inside me meanwhile; probably that kiss or the blood which I could still taste on my lips. I said "Why should I believe you ?" She said, "I am your reflection, Bijon. I am the one you love the most. I am the one who can't explain you the meaning of life. I am the better half of your conscious, hiding inside. Listen to me, Bijon, I am You !" 

There was a thunder struck outside. I could see her in that sharp light. My blood had made her lips red, dark red. 

"I Love You" She said in a hypnotic tone. I hugged her tight and I was melting. There were goosebumps all over and I was in a state of arousal. 

The memories after that are all fade, hazy and for some reason I didn't want to remember. I have never seen her after that night and have not missed her either. Seems like she is very much inside me, caring and pampering all the time. I can feel her presence the whole night. Her touch, that distinct scent plays with my senses, from somewhere very deep I can hear the symphony of her voice. I know she will remain inside me for ever, she promised me so. I call her the better half of my conscious. There are friends here but I hardly talk to them and they don't bother me as well. Life circles here around the bed and an occasional stroll to the garden. There are few ladies here dressed like nurse. They serve me food here three times a day with a packet water and some medicine too; but life is good here. The life is good here at Home...sweet Home. 