From: Ray Shih <rvshih@gmail.com>
Date: 14 December 2013 02:23
Subject: Sumission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com
Bio: I am a new writer and have not had anything published yet. I recently completed a collection of short stories, earning me a Creative Writing Certificate at the University of Toronto; this story is part of that collection. Other than that, I have been a regular contributor for my organization's blog; examples of my work can be found at http://www.grandchallenges.ca/author/raymondshih/. 

*Foreign* 

I feel the rumble in my seat, jolting my eyes awake.  It's way too early to have been awake twice already. 

"Good morning ladies and gentlemen.  We have just touched down in Patna. The local time is 6:35 AM.  It is a sunny 38 degrees Celsius outside and is expected to stay sunny for the entire day.  On behalf of the captain and crew, we thank you for choosing Air India.  Please do not stand..." 

I didn't choose Air India.  It was the only airline that could get me in and out of here in time for my meetings. 

I retract that statement, it was the only airline that I've heard of that could get me in and out of here in time for my meetings.  Part of my personal travel policy is not gallivanting in the developing world on airlines I've never heard of. 

I open the window and squint as the blinding sun pours into the cabin. 

"Thank you Mr. Lee" 

I turn around to see the stewardess holding out my suit jacket. 

"Thank you, Sunita or Sujeeta or whatever," I thought.  Instead, I acknowledge with a smile. 

The plane finally halts.  The fasten seatbelt sign gets switched off, followed by the crazy jostling behind for position in the aisle.  I bend forward to grab my computer bag and head towards the exit.  A blast of heat hits me instantly as I step out of the plane onto the stairs.  My suit protects my skin initially, keeping me from feeling the sun's full intensity.  This won't last long.  My body temperature rises in step with my urgency to get to the terminal. 

The terminal offers only partial relief.  It is air conditioned, but the air is a potent cocktail of incense, various local foods, poorly ventilated bathrooms, and the smell of unwashed feet.  The flies buzzing around only add to my discomfort as I scan the area simultaneously for my luggage and a sign with my name on it. 

A slap on my back is followed by a familiar "Hullooooo! How was your flight?" 

I wheel around and see Anand Chauhan standing before me.  A tall rotund man with a thick moustache and a mischievous grin, he is unmistakable even in a crowd in India.  He wears a simple grey suit with a white dress shirt.  A maroon tie pinches his neck, sealing his collar to his neck.  Drops of sweat dot his shirt. 

"It was fine.  Thanks for coming to pick me up Anand.  You really didn't have to." 

"Nonsense.  With you coming all the way from Canada, the least I could do is travel fifteen minutes to get you from the airport." 

"Well, thanks again.  Could I suggest that we both take our ties off?  Just because I'm here on official business doesn't mean we both have to be uncomfortable right?" 

As I would have guessed, Anand does not resist.  I feel relieved seeing him liberated from his constraint.  After my suitcase appears on the baggage belt, we head to the parking lot where Anand introduces me to two of his colleagues.  Their names contain many syllables, all pronounced quickly.  I am relieved to exchange business cards so at least I read them and try to commit them to memory. 

Looking down, I see that I will have no chance of remembering these names. However, I can also see that they are both assistant researchers.  With Anand being the lead researcher, I am fairly confident that I won't need to remember.  They are here to show commitment to the project, but will not say anything that will jeopardize their funding. 

We squeeze into a Toyota sedan and head out into the city.  On the right, the edge of the airport territory is lined with palm trees and well manicured lawns.  On the left are green fields with emaciated cattle. Dotting the landscape are tents and other makeshift settlements.  People are lying on the sidewalk, on the grass, and in the shade of trees.  Their dark skin and previously bright clothing is as dusty as everything else here.  Nobody outside of our vehicle weighs more than 120 pounds. 

We begin to wind through the city of Patna and navigate the various users of the road.  Cars.  Trucks.  Pedestrians.  Motorbikes.  Rickshaws. Cattle.  The occasional elephant.  No one drives or moves in a straight line here.   Lane markers do not act as boundaries.  They simply indicate the general direction of the horde. 

I look out the window, which doesn't help.  There are people everywhere. The sidewalks are packed to capacity as locals cross the street with seemingly no regard to the traffic zipping around them.  As my mind tries to adapt to the increased stimulation, my responses to Anand are now limited to grunts and short acknowledgements.  "Yes", "Fantastic!", "Great to hear", and the like. 

Drivers use their horns as a form of sonar.  They honk every few seconds to signal distance to the cars around them.  The noise is dizzying.  At the next stoplight, I open the window to get some air.  Bad idea.  Children, who were previously doing backflips and cartwheels to solicit attention, swarm to the open window and bark at me while holding out their hands.  I don't understand the local language, but some things don't require translation.  The smell of exhaust fills the vehicle and I immediately shut the window. 

We pull off again.  My temperature rises.  I swallow constantly and begin taking deep breaths.  Anand indicates that we have arrived at the research center, not a moment too soon.  I swing the door open while dry heaving and coughing.  I'm able to hold in my breakfast but unable to contain my embarrassment. 

"I'm so sorry.  I've been fighting a stomach bug" I lie as I wipe my saliva with my sleeve. 

"No problem, it happens to the best of us." 

We proceed inside.  As we make our way down the hall towards a meeting room, other employees spot conversations and acknowledge Anand.  After that duty, they just stare blankly at me.  They have seen other Caucasians that have flown in with promises of aid and funds.  They don't know what to make of an Oriental. 

As a group, we sit down in a simple boardroom.  Laid out on the table are cookies and tea.  I can't eat anything.  Despite almost emptying my stomach on the sidewalk, I still don't feel hungry.  We begin to discuss next steps but are interrupted every five minutes or so for an introduction to someone new that had some peripheral involvement with their grant application. First it is a staff accountant that worked on the budgets.  This is followed by meeting a clinical worker that will prepare samples.  Within half an hour, I have no idea who I'm talking to anymore. 

Later in the morning, I meet the head accountant (I believe his name is Sandeep?) to discuss financial risk.  After some small talk, I get down to business.  Running down my checklist, I start with some soft ball questions. 

"Did you prepare the budgets that accompanied this submission?" 

"Yes" 

"Was this reviewed by the proposed project lead?" 

"Yes" 

"Are your financial statements audited annually by licensed accounting firm?" 

"Yes" accompanied by a side-to-side head nod.  Uh-oh.  I've never been to Patna before, but I am close to many Indian people in Canada.  When I asked about this, they told me that in India, this side-to-side head nod is ubiquitous.  To a westerner, it looks like a mix between nodding affirmative and shaking negative.  It does not inspire confidence. 

"EVERY year?" 

"Yes" with another side-to-side head nod. 

"Please send them to me via email within the next week." 

This time, the side-to-side head nod is accompanied by a small frown.  I still can't tell whether they have the statements or not.  I guess I'll find out in a week.  Moving on. 

"How did you reach your cost estimates?  Was it primarily based on past expenditures or did you contact suppliers for quotes?" 

"A little of both" with the head nod.  Well, which was it?  It almost doesn't even matter.  As the meeting continues, almost every answer is now being either deflected or answered with the non-committal gesture and my frustration grows.   Adding to my irritation are mosquitos that have somehow figured out how to access my tasty foreign skin through my suit, shirt, and undershirt.  I feel each bite and try my best not to wince.   My leg starts to twitch and my eyes dart around the room looking for an escape.  I need a break. 

I mumble some bullshit about having to check in with head office and I excuse myself into the hallway.  I take a deep breath and pull out my mobile phone.  I scan through my contacts and dial our corporate travel agent.  After several rings, I am relieved to hear a voice on the other line. 

"Business Travel Experts.  My name is Catherine.  How can I help you Mr. Lee?" 

"Hi there.  I am currently in Patna, India and scheduled to leave tomorrow afternoon.  Is there any chance we can move that up so I take off tonight? I won't need a full two days anymore." 

"Let's take a look here... it looks like I can get out leaving Patna at 9PM. This will arrive in Toronto at 1PM via Delhi and then Frankfurt.  Will that work for you?" 

"Yes, that sounds great.  There is still a business class seat available right?" 

"Yup.  Your flight will be on business.  I'll send the info to your Blackberry shortly.  Is there anything else I can do for you today?" 

"No that's it.  Thanks so much." 

"Enjoy your flight back." 

I brace myself and re-enter the room with Sandeep.  To my relief, he suggests we eat lunch before continuing our session.  He leads me to the employee cafeteria where we join the rest of the group.  I salivate in anticipation of the local cuisine, including paranthas, naan, paneer, and a variety of curries and sauces.   The colours are vibrant and the spices should be used as antihistamines back home since they seem to instantly clear my sinuses.  Despite the entire meal being vegetarian, it is deliciously satisfying.  This is probably because these locals know how to make proper vegetarian cuisine, not just tofu versions of meat. 

The afternoon meetings continue much as the morning.  I continue to fill out my checklists and reports.  I thank the team and make it known that I have cancelled tomorrow's meeting as I need to get back to Toronto.  Anand and his team look at each other with some trepidation.  If I could do it with any credibility, now would be a good time for me to execute an ironic side-to-side head nod. 

I get back into Anand's vehicle and head out towards the airport.  My mind is numb from the activities of the day.  The setting sun and cooler air make the ride back feel more comfortable than I was this morning.  Without the nausea of the in-bound trip, I scan the surrounding traffic as we sit in gridlock.  With business out of the way, Anand and I finally talk about his time getting his PhD at Waterloo.  It turns out we both share the same love-hate relationship with the dysfunctional Toronto Raptors basketball team.   Just as Anand is beginning a humorous discourse about Chris Bosh's desertion to the Miami Heat, a vehicle on our right side grabs my attention. 

It is a small ambulance.  In the back is a woman with her hands and yellow sari covered in blood.  I can almost hear her pain as she pleads at an unnamed victim to stay in this world.  The husband or child or relative is lying out of our view but its presence is obvious.  She begins praying for an intervention.  While this is going on in the cabin, the ambulance driver looks nonchalantly at the endless traffic boxing them in.  I feel this image of routine helplessness harden my soul.  To survive here is to ignore others that are dying.  Is it worth trying to improve this dire situation against such odds?  Or should we just ignore it until our gods solve everything for us? 

I turn to the left-hand side of this vehicle and I catch the eye of a teenage girl standing in a crowded bus.   She is wearing a bright blue hotel uniform, which stands out amongst the sea of haggard men jockeying for space around her.  Her smooth dark skin and gold nose piercing make her exotic and attractive.  She looks right at me.  The look in her eyes tell me she's trying to make sense of why an oriental guy in a suit is riding back seat on a freeway in Patna.  I also wonder what her story is. 

I close my eyes and rest for the remainder of the trek back to the airport.  I say goodbye to Anand, assure him that he will hear from our office soon about a funding decision, and thank him for his team's hospitality. 

After checking in and depositing my baggage, I pull out my Blackberry to check my messages.  There are dozens but one immediately catches my eye. My wife, Subramani, has told me that she's booked another meeting with our divorce lawyer for next Friday.  I sigh and type a self-reminder: "Support Anand's project". 