From: T Bisht <tcbisht@gmail.com>
Date: 17 February 2014 20:18
Subject: Submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com
Bio: Tulsi Charan Bisht has a PhD in anthropology and works with the Asian Development Bank in Manila, Philippines. He has published in international academic journals and edited books. His short stories have been published in the online literary magazine 'Muse India'. He is also working for the last few years on a novel that deals with the idea of 'slowness'. 

*Death of a Clerk* 

Manohar Pandit died on a mild autumn afternoon, on 18th of November at 3 PM to be precise. His death was a tragicomic event in his locality, a Central Government employees' residential colony in South Delhi. His body, covered by a white cloth, was laid out on the small veranda of his apartment. His wife, whose real name was Indu but was teasingly known as Matku, wept sitting close to his body. The two daughters, Sita and Gita, sitting by her sides, also wept though intermittently tried to comfort their mother. Chunnu, the only son, who was just seven years old, cried for some time; then disappeared in the back lane where his friends were playing marbles. The neighbours  and acquaintances that had gathered were sad and somber for Manohar's untimely demise. 

"This is not the way to die. He still had fourteen years to retire from government service", someone in the crowd remarked. 

"Yes, two daughters to marry and a son to raise. So many responsibilities...Now all have fallen on Indu Bhabhi", another intervened, maintaining the solemnity of the moment and calling Manohar's wife by her real name. 

"God give her courage and strength." 

On these words Matku burst into tears again. She was in her mid-forties and just about five feet in height. Years of physical inactivity had added considerably to her weight. The three main parts of her body - the pelvis and below, the torso, and above the neck - were connected to one another like train compartments that gave her walk rhythmic movements and earned her the name Matku. She loved to rouge her cheeks and wore bright red lipstick. On her shopping sprees to various bazaars, *Mangal* Bazaar,*Buddh* Bazaar and *Sani* Bazaar, one of her favoured activity was to renew the supply of these items. On her last foray to the *Sani* Bazaar, despite Manohar's warning that he was going to die soon and as a widow she would not be able to use the items, she had laughed and bought home a robust supply of rouges and lipsticks. Thinking of those items, now sitting unused in her steel *almirah,* added to the grief that shook her body in spasmodic fits. 

Manohar knew he was going to die and he had predicted it. "I will die by mid-November. And I am still working to predict the exact date and time," he would tell people who asked him about his wellbeing. People laughed at him, taking it for another of his whims. And as he started preparing for his death, few said that he was turning senile at an early age and suggested he sought treatment. 

Manohar was an upper division clerk or more respectfully a *Bare Babu*, in the Postal Department of the Government of India. For twenty-two years, since he joined the department, he had been running to and fro between his residence and office, dealing with household affairs and official files with equal dexterity and dedication. But this grind of daily life, between home and office, did not dampen his creative zeal. He had such fanciful ideas that when he shared them with people they laughed at the evident impracticality of his ideas. But so certain was he of the great potential of his ideas that he did not share some of these with anyone, not even with his beloved Matku, for the fear that someone would steal his ideas and use these beforehand to become famous. 

Though Menorah was an upper division clerk, a rank higher than the postman, he fancied being a postman. This fancy arose from his desire to compile one of the most evocative books ever produced. The world of letters mesmerised him. When the employees emptied bag after jute bag marked 'Postal Department' into heaps of letters, Manohar was transported into another world. These heaps were like little volcanoes; they contained so much - anger, love, hate, desire, sex, intrigue and sorrow - occasioned by all sorts of human activities. And what variety - written by so many different minds, in so many different situations, in so many different moods. If he could select just a handful of them, enough to compile a book, it would be one of the best books ever produced. It would have every conceivable thing a reader might look for in a book. And he would become the best-known author; Manohar often thought with a smile, basking in that imagined glory. 

At times, when the staff dealing with letters went for long tea or lunch breaks, leaving those heaps unattended, Manohar approached them, touched the letters, thought of possessing them, was even tempted to take away a handful. But, somewhere deep inside, a flicker of conscience would stop him and he would return to his seat, to the postal department's files that held so little interest for him. Only if he were a postman, he thought, would he be able to undertake his project. Often, letters were addressed wrongly; often people refused to accept the letters addressed to previous tenants, and so on and so forth. There were possibilities as a postman, but unfortunately Menorah wasn't one. 

His zeal to compile the book, however, had him looking for other ways to collect the letters. In the big hall that he shared as his office with other department employees, a number of posters hung casually on the discoloured walls. These posters were one of the ways government departments tried to make themselves presentable - ethically and aesthetically. One such poster that hung from the wall said 'Charity Begins at Home'. It caught Manohar's eye and gave him a lead. 

He waited for the weekend and on that fine Saturday morning, while Matku was putting on rouge and lipstick, his two daughters were oiling their hair, and Chunnu, his nose running furiously, was watching grown-up boys fly kites, he declared that he was going to clean the two-room tenement. Matku looked at him apprehensively but thought that even if the idea was a drive of his fancy it was a good one and continued with her *maquillage*. Manohar took this for tacit approval and started cleaning the house. By Sunday evening, though he was left exhausted and the house looked much neater, Menorah's book project had hardly moved ahead. 

From all that labour, he could salvage only four letters and a couple of wedding invitation cards - some of them folded in paper aeroplane shape by Chunnu. Of the four letters, two were written by Matku. During more than two decades of their matrimonial togetherness, Matku had been away only twice - both times to her parent's village, just a couple of hours journey from Delhi. Written in her thick hand, both the letters read exactly the same - four lines reporting her arrival at her parent's house and the date on which she would return. The other two letters were also written by a single person - a distant relative of Manohar - in both cases, explaining the difficulties of finding employment and asking for Manohar's help. He looked despairingly at that hard-earned booty and reproached himself for the lack of variety and emotion in his life. 

Yet he was determined to realise his book project and thought of the neighbourhood. The logical extension of 'Charity begins at Home' he thought would be 'It spreads to the Neighbourhood'. And Manohar started scheming about how to extend his reach to the neighbouring houses and make away with their old letters. It was a neighbourhood of rich cultural mix. But he did not interact much with his neighbours, and even if he could visit some of the houses, it was almost impossible to get hold of their old letters. The only possible way he could imagine was to use Chunnu's friends, so he lured them with lollipops to get the job done. And as his first supplies came in, he felt assured that his scheme would work. 

But just after a few days, while he was still expecting more supplies, one evening as Manohar was returning home from his office, the ominous thing happened. The mothers of the two boys from whom he had got his first supplies were waiting in their respective balconies and as they saw him entering his house, launched their verbal attack calling Manohar '*chitthi chor'*. Manohar, pale and shaking, went straight inside and laid down on his wooden cot. Matku was preparing tea on a noisy kerosene stove and did not hear the initial outburst from the neighbours. But when she came with the tea cup and found her husband laying on his cot and heard her household being accused in the verbal assault, she threw a long, searching glance at her husband and went straight outside to the veranda. Like a seasoned general, she took stock of the situation for a moment, then arms akimbo, matched the shouting neighbours with equal fury - word for word, gesture for gesture. Following the ancient rules of warfare, as night fell and the warring parties' voices turned hoarse, the battle ended for the day. Triumphant, Matku returned to her husband who was still lying on the cot and asked for the explanation. She, however, failed to understand his clarifications and warned her husband that if he continued with his antics she would have to call a witch doctor. Then she asked for the letters that he had collected and giving them to Chunnu ordered him to "throw the letters on the neighbours' faces". 

The incident gave a pause to Menorah's creative activities. Though he still dreamt about his grandiose projects, he stopped sharing them with others, much less practicing them. Now, his ideas would be his secret treasures till the moment was right to make them public, to long-awaited appreciation. 

Manohar's desire to do something different had grown with him. Growing up in the lanes of Old Delhi, he was fifth of the seven siblings. His father was a *halwaai*, running a small sweetmeat shop in one of the narrow lanes. From his early childhood, Manohar was booed as a *dhillu*, someone with slow reflexes. Out on escapades with his coevals to steal guavas or lychees from the nearby gardens, he would usually be caught by the gardeners. While others would jump over the wall and disappear in the lane-ways, he would meekly stand by the wall and would get thrashed by the irate gardeners. Or he would get the beating from the shopkeepers as his pals broke their electric bulbs by taking aim at them with pebbles. Inside the house also for the mischief of his siblings, he would often get caught to face his father's wrath and would get smacked by the wooden spoon that his father used for stirring boiling milk to make sweets. 

But Manohar knew that the slowness of his reactions was not congenital. He knew that his inability to jump over the garden walls or to run fast like his friends was the result of his ill fitting, handed down pants that kept falling. Though from the early childhood he had a roly-poly physique, he knew he had an agile brain. And his ability to keep passing his school exams was a proof of it.  While none of his siblings could go beyond the sixth standard, he trundled his way through the twelfth standard. Though all through his schooling he passed third division, unlike his siblings or a number of his coevals he never failed. People complemented Manohar's father and though his father had no concern about his children's education, felt proud and on such occasions gave Manohar a handful of sweetmeats. 

Manohar had done well in his postal department job too. He had been promoted to the rank of the upper division clerk and it was certain that he would retire as a section officer. He had a good work record and was never been reprimanded by his superiors. This had confirmed Monohar's resolve about his ability to do outstanding things and even though others laughed at his ideas, to him these never appeared outlandish. 

One of the few luxuries in Manohar's life was his daily visit to Jagdish's 'Paan and Cigarette Stall', a small, wooden structure at the entrance of the colony. Every evening after he had had his *chai*, Manohar would go the stall and purchase two *paans* and two Charminar cigarettes. Chewing *paan* and puffing cigarette, he would stand by the stall and shared the daily gossip with Jagdish, while the second *paan* and cigarette he would take away with him for an after-dinner indulgence. 

Jagdish was a runaway from a village in eastern Utter Pradesh.  After initial hardships and struggles he had learned the art of survival and had established the stall that did a modest business. He sold *paan* and cigarettes to the grown-ups, chewing gums and lollies to children, and matchboxes and incense sticks to women. Loud film music blared from his stall most of the time. Apart from being the handiest shopkeeper to the residential area, Jagdish was also a hub of local gossip. Dealing with a number of customers, he deftly passed information from one to another, his *paan*-juice stained lips always smiling. Jagdish's ability to handle information so naturally was a great attraction for Manohar and he secretly envied him. 

It was during one of these daily visits to Jagdish's stall, Manohar found the grand fantasy that ultimately led to his untimely and self-prophesied demise. It was a July evening and the first rain of monsoon had washed the dusty sky of Delhi. Manohar took a shower on his return from his office and after his *chai*, he put on his loose cotton pyjama and a half-sleeved bush shirt and went to Jagdish's stall. The rain had made the air humid and a thin streak of sweat trickled down his neck as he stood by the stall puffing on his cigarette, listening to Jagdish's new stories. Suddenly he heard a shrill voice shouting '*Sita Ram' *so close to his ear that he jumped in surprise. Jagdish laughed and indicated to a parrot in a cage that was hanging by his stall. One of Jagdish's friends was going to his village and wanted someone to look after his bird until he returned. As it did not demand too much of work, Jagdish had agreed. The parrot had been taught the phrase '*Sita Ram*' that it repeated at its fancy or to attract people's attention. Manohar looked at it, its red beak reminded him of Matku's lipstick painted lips. 

"Isn't it amazing that these birds can copy the human voice?" he had asked Jagdish who was busy making *paan* for a customer and had just nodded his head. Manohar looked back at the parrot which, finding someone paying attention, shrieked twice more. 

"Birds, also, have language of their own" Jagdish, who had finished with the customer and had turned back to Manohar, said. 

"What do you mean?" 

"Yes, they talk amongst themselves." Jagdish explained to a surprised Manohar. 

"How do you know this?" 

"Because I know a *sadhu* who is a master of bird language." Jagdish said. 

"What? A master of bird language!" 

"Yes" 

"Where, in your village?" 

"No, no, here in Delhi, in Mahrauli." 

The talk with Jagdish made Manohar  think for long time in the night. Birds fly from one house to another, from one locality to the next and they must know all the gossip, all the stories. Only if he could learn the bird language he would have access to so much of information and his book project could materialise. And for the next two days and nights a new scheme simmered in his head until he got the address of the sadhu from Jagdish. 

Soon Manohar was on a new mission - learning bird language. He converted a shorthand pad into a notebook in which he wrote down his lessons. During these learning sessions, he could be seen sitting reverentially and taking notes as the sahdu explained the nuances of bird language between puffs of hashish supplied by Manohar as a token fee. These sessions were followed by practical and Manohar wandered in search of different species of birds in order to understand the new phonetics. But birds were rare in his area, which ebbed and flowed with human voices and other commotions. The only bird specie that frequented the locality was crow and there was nothing of interest in its ominous croaking. Nor did the area around his office offer many possibilities. Though leafy trees surrounded the area, pigeons ruled supreme there and these birds spent most of the time copulating openly on the windowsills. Manohar had decided that their talks must be too obscene to be followed. 

The only alternative that he could visualize was the shrinking green patches of Delhi, where one might still hear the chirping of different birds. So on weekends, after finishing his domestic chores, he wandered into these green oases. Matku did not mind his disappearance as long as he did his household duties. She even liked the idea of him following his whims out of the house and out of the neighbourhood. 

And every Saturday, Manohar would get into local buses to visit the green patches of the city. He visited them all - the Ridge near Maharoli, the Deer Park, the Lodhi Garden, the Buddha Garden and other such places where he could hear birds chirping. During these visits he would be seen standing under the trees, the notebook and a ballpoint pen in his hands, taking notes. So intently did he look upwards into the branches that by evening his neck would be sore. Matku though weary of her husband's fancies, was a devout wife and often massaged his aching neck with warm oil. 

But as the weeks passed by, Matku began to grow suspicious of her husband's weekly disappearances and on one Saturday in early October, she decided to put an end to it. That day, Manohar ventured away from his South Delhi home to the Ridge near the Delhi University. In those green thickets he found so many chirping birds that he felt his long and tiring journey turning fruitful. He went from one thicket to another,  taking notes. He did not worry about the sneaky couples who found his activities more interesting than their own romantic adventures. And as the evening turned dense and he had filled quite a few pages, he heard a soulful twittering.  Manohar's hand stopped writing. He looked up desperately into the trees but could see nothing in the falling darkness. The sickle of the stray moon had appeared in the sky and a silence had fallen over the Ridge. Manohar, however, had heard the message loud and clear, "Manohar Pandit you are going to die by mid November" and he wrote the message in his notebook. 

When he returned home, Matku was waiting outside, in the veranda, ready to take up the cudgel. But when she saw a pale and tired Manohar, she went straight to the kitchen and prepared a steaming cup of *chai*. Manohar laid down on his cot, the soulful twitter ringing in his ears. When Matku returned after half an hour and saw him still lying on the cot, the cup of *chai* untouched, she said firmly: 

"No more of your useless wandering from tomorrow. You will remain at home." 

"But, I have to go tomorrow. I have to discuss something very important." Manohar said, raising himself from the bed. 

"No, you are not going anywhere. No more discussions. Did you see your face? Why is it so pale?" 

Manohar rubbed his hand over his face, looked at his wife and haltingly said, "I am going to die by mid November." 

Matku's little eyes twinkled and she burst into laughter. But then she steadied herself and asked, "You haven't taken to smoking *bhang*? Have you?" 

"No, and I am serious about what I told you." 

"Well, I am not bothered about your whims, but you are not going out of the house except for work." 

Manohar knew his wife's resolve was as solid as her dwarfish frame and only after much pleading she agreed to his going out for one day, but she also extracted a promise that he would remain in the house afterwards. 

Next day, his meeting with the *sadhu* was inconclusive. The *sadhu* sucked on cigarettes filled with hashish as Manohar narrated his experience. For a long time the *sadhu* remained silent, but finally told Manohar that he might have misinterpreted what he heard. "But I heard the message very clear" Manohar insisted. The *sadhu* fell silent again, smoked a few more cigarettes and said that life and death were *maya* or illusion, that he should not worry, and closed his blood-shot eyes. Manohar sat by the *sadhu's* feet, hoping that he would open his eyes, but after a long wait, he got up and left for home. 

Matku had put a halt to Manohar's wanderings and on weekends he remained inside the house. A sudden change had come over him - most of the time he spent with Chunnu sitting on his knees. He would call his daughters and advise them to look after their mother and help her run the household. He started preparing the accounts of his savings, including his Provident Fund, Postal Saving Certificates and other small deposits. He even asked his colleagues in the accounts section to calculate how much pension Matku would receive after his death. He still visited the *paan* shop in the evening but his heart was no longer in the earthly gossip. When people asked him how he was, he simply answered, "preparing for the final journey". People laughed. Chunnu, especially, complained as his friends frequently teased him that his father had gone mad. Matku castigated her husband a couple of times but turned quiet thinking that with time this fancy would be overtaken by something else. 

Manohar, however, still held a secret desire to predict the exact date and time of his demise, and prove that his ideas were not mere whims, that if he was not caught in the grind of life he would have realised some of his grandiose projects. Now, with death approaching, all he could think of was making exact prediction about his death. But Matku having put a stop to his wanderings, even that possibility looked remote. It seemed inevitable to him that he would die in an uneventful way. 

As November, approached Manohar became quieter. And as mid-November passed, he became restless. Was it going to be proved another of his whims? Was it to turn into another farce? He wondered, looking at the shorthand pad where he had noted the message. Though no one said a thing, he felt people smiling at him, their eyes questioning him. He stopped going out with his colleagues and ate his lunch at his desk. He had lost his interest in the postal department files and all those years of dedicated service suddenly appeared useless to him. 

On 18th November, Manohar had finished his lunch and was staring at the shorthand notepad. His section officer suddenly appeared from his cabin and asked for a file that Manohar hadn't yet finished. After lecturing Manohar how good and punctual he used to be at his work and how he had now become a laughing stock, and advising him to pull himself up, the officer asked him to complete the file by 3PM. 

Manohar started working on the file, his head submerged in reference books. At least he should not be treated as incompetent, he thought. As he finished the file and closed it to take it to the section officer he noticed a strange light flashing next to his window where on the sill the pigeons often made merry. A tiny bird of all conceivable colours sat there glistening in the afternoon sun. Manohar looked at it, mesmerised. The bird twittered. Yes, that was the voice that had told about him dying in November. He listened intently. The bird twittered again and that was it: 'November 18, 3PM' Manohar wrote on his shorthand pad. When he lifted his head to look back at the window, the bird had flown and was now sitting on a tree outside. Drawn by some power, Manohar came out of the office. The bird was still on the tree and as he stood under it, the bird fluttered its tiny colourful wings and flew, this time across the road. Manohar followed, his eyes fixed on the bird. In a moment, he was in the middle of the crowded road and as the nearby clock of the tower struck three, a heavily laden truck passed over Manohar, plastering his body on the freshly-tarred road. 

"Let's prepare the body for the crematorium before it gets too late," someone in the crowd said. 

"We should get some marigold garlands," another suggested. 

"Yes, yes, he had such a strong vision - he could predict exact date and time of his death. We must decorate the body properly, like that of a saint," a third voice said. 

As the people began the preparations, somewhere in the vicinity a bird twittered softly, and clutching to her heart the shorthand pad that was lying next to Manohar's body, Matku burst in tears again. 