From: Zara Kaiserimam <zaramughal82@gmail.com>
Date: 6 April 2014 18:32
Subject: submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com
Bio: Zara Mughal lives in London. She has a BA in English from Queen Mary, University of London and an MA in 19th Century English Literature from King's College London. When she's not writing, Zara works as a teacher at a private international school in West London where she regularly horrifies and entertains her pupils with her knowledge of all things macabre. 

Salad 

The house was brightly lit and a steady hum of noise trickled out from within. Outside, the heat was oppressive and the askari sat slumped in his watchman’s hut, oblivious to the deafening crick crick crick of the locusts. Inside, the smell of sweat, fried food and perfume lingered heavily in the air. Nadia used her paper plate to fan herself as Naila chattered away to the girl sat next to her. 

“I hear it’s a love marriage,” she said lowering her voice, “he’s far better looking than her, don’t you think?” 

The two girls melted in a fit of uncontrollable giggling. 

Nadia rose, adjusted her sari and tried, with little success, to catch sight of her brother in the crowded room. The Bedis’ functions were always extravagant affairs and this one, like the many others before it, would be talked about by all of Pangani for days to come. Simran, the Bedis’ rather plain and somewhat gormless eldest daughter, had by some miraculous feat ensnared herself a boy, a surprisingly handsome one at that, and tonight the entire Asian population of Pangani had flocked there to the see the spectacle. Or, as they told themselves and each other, they had come to share in the young couple’s joy. 

Nadia was bored and hungry. It was an eternity since she had arrived and it seemed like forever since she had looked disgustedly upon the gaudy gold tinsel and the even gaudier tea lights which garlanded the Bedis’ gargantuan house. 

“I’m going to get something to eat, are you coming?” 

Naila was busy giving her companion a feature by feature deconstruction of the poor bride to be, and dismissed her cousin distractedly with a hurried wave of her hand. 

Nadia slowly made her way over to the buffet table, balancing precariously on her platform heels. Her progress was made sluggish by the fleshy bodies of countless ‘aunties’ crowding the room, their heaving chests and bulging hips filling it like water. 

“Oh sorry, beta!” squealed one, as a sidewards thrust of her hip almost toppled Nadia over. 

The buffet table was awash with colour. Steaming golden biryanis and fragrant red curries sat beside mountainous platters of pakoras, samosas and all manner of fried delights. A rainbow assortment of mithai adorned the outer edges of the table and a group of children lurked nearby, hopeful for opportunities to grab handfuls of jalebis when there were no adults in sight. Nadia narrowly avoided a particularly grubby little urchin who was ready to smear his sticky hands on her silk sari. She made a mental note to avoid the sweets that evening. 

The scent of the food had attracted a swarm of women who descended on it with vigour. The buffet area was a blur of sequins and glitter as women frantically filled their plates and clamoured raucously for more tandoori chicken or fresh naan to be brought out immediately by the poor, harassed servants. 

You’d think they hadn’t eaten in years, thought Nadia, as she waited patiently for an opportunity to approach the table, although just watching the women gorge themselves to the point of bursting had left her feeling quite full. There was a constant stream of food being brought over, but the smell of the oil which oozed from it made Nadia feel rather sick. 

And then she saw it. There, perched alone, on a hostess trolley by the main table, was a large bowl of salad. Crisp, clean, fresh and green; dewy batons of cucumber cradled in a bed of lettuce; tomatoes, blood red and succulent, like glistening jewels; strands of red onion, celery and sunshine disks of carrot. 

Nadia demurely picked up her second paper plate of the evening and reached for the salad tongs. She filled her plate and moved towards a reasonably quiet corner of the impossibly noisy room. There, two crones she had seen earlier at the buffet table were whispering conspiratorially. 

“What did you think of the food, Surinder?” 

“Maza ni aya,” Surinder replied, her leathery jowls shuddering violently as she shook her head despairingly. 

“Yes, I agree... the biryani was cold,” her companion added gleefully, turning to peer intently at Nadia through her thick glasses, “and the meat too tough.” 

Nadia rolled her eyes and edged away from the pair before they had a chance to speak to her. She found another spot and sat down to enjoy her salad. She bit into a tomato and felt its soft flesh bursting in her mouth. She enjoyed the tickling sensation the small seeds left on her tongue and relished the slight tanginess of the fruit. Yes, she had made the right choice. 

“Nadia!” her brother’s voice carried over the din. 

Nadia put down her plate and hurriedly gulped down a mouthful of salad. Zain had found her and was taking off his jacket. 

“Here, hold this,” he handed it to her, “I’m going to help Kirpal with something...” 

“When can we leave?” 

“If you’d let me finish... I’m going to help Kirpal with something and then we can leave. Make sure Naila...  hey, what’s wrong with you? What are you doing to your face?” 

There was something lodged between her teeth, at the very back of her mouth. Her lips were twisted in a grimace as she unsuccessfully manipulated her tongue around her mouth in an attempt to dislodge whatever it was. 

“I think there’s something in my teeth,” she said, but Zain had already disappeared. 

She felt someone grab her arm and propel her towards the centre of the room. It was Naila. 

“Let’s go see Simran!” said Naila dragging Nadia along, “I want to see her ring.” 

“Do we have to speak to her?” moaned Nadia, eager to return to the more pressing task of emancipating whatever it was from her teeth. “She’s so dull!” 

“Shh! Someone will hear you! Come on, it’ll be fun … Simran! Congratulations! You look stunning!” Naila flashed her most brilliant smile. “And wow, what a ring!” 

Simran sat surrounded by an array of women and young girls. She stared vacantly around her and played absently with the gold, diamond and ruby monstrosity that her chubby finger was wedged into. Nadia ran her tongue over her teeth. The offending object was long, coarse and sinewy in texture. Probably from the celery, she speculated. 

“...aren’t we Nadia?... Nadia!” Naila tugged on her arm and brought her back to reality, “I was just telling Simran...” 

A toothpick. That’s what she needed or a mirror. She tried again, this time using her tongue to push it upwards. But to no avail. It wasn’t going anywhere. 

“... and Aman says we’ll go to Mauritius for our honeymoon...” 

Perhaps some water might help? There was something unusual about its taste. It wasn’t like celery or carrot for that matter. There was something almost metallic about its flavour, something bitter. 

“... my father is giving Aman a Subaru as an engagement...” 

Would anyone notice if she just used her finger? If she did it quickly she might just get away with it. Or was that just too ill mannered? She just couldn’t stop running her tongue over it; couldn’t stop thinking about it. 

“Oh Simran, that’s just lovely! Isn’t it Nadia... Nadia?! What are you doing to your face?” 

“Excuse me, I have to use the bathroom.” She glared at Naila and handed her Zain’s jacket. She glanced at Simran, taking in her downy upper lip and frowning mono-brow. Poor Aman, she thought. 

The downstairs toilet was occupied. Unwilling to wait, Nadia made her way up the sprawling, spiral staircase, carefully avoiding servants, male friends and relatives who were rushing up and down, carrying covered plastic tubs. On her way up she couldn’t help but notice the hideous paintings hanging on the walls. She was struck particularly by an ugly portrait of a fearsome looking old woman who bore a striking resemblance to Simran. Nadia smiled to herself, hurried up the stairs and turned left into the corridor where the bathroom was located. She was almost run over by a sweaty young man with a plastic bowl. She caught a flash of green. It was Simran’s youngest brother. 

“Sorry Nadia! It’s mad up here... are you heading to the bathroom?” he asked “Hold on a second,” he looked over his shoulder and shouted, “Oi! Boys, the lady needs the bathroom. Chalo, clear off for a bit!” 

There was a great flurry of activity near the bathroom, and several men came out, pushed some plastic tubs out of the way and made room for Nadia to pass. Slightly embarrassed, Nadia went in and locked the door behind her, shutting out at least some of the noise of the party which continued downstairs. 

Nadia breathed a sigh of relief. At last she’d be able to attend to the matter of her teeth. She lifted her skirts and hovered over the toilet seat. Even the bathroom was gaudy with its garish gold taps and shiny marble tiles, she thought as she gazed leisurely around the room. It was then that she caught sight of the contents of the large, circular bathtub. It was full of water and ice and... something else. 

Nadia quickly wiped herself, flushed the toilet, and moved closer. Floating like lilies on the surface of a pond were hundreds of lettuce leaves, and beneath the surface whole tomatoes, carrots, onions and cucumbers lay submerged like the drowned victims of a shipwreck. It was then that she noticed the knives and the strainers lying on the floor and only then did she make sense of the plastic tubs; the men transporting mysterious goods up and down the stairs. It was from here, from inside the tub where three generations of the Bedi family cleansed their filth ridden bodies daily, that her salad came. 

Tentatively she passed her tongue over the strand of thick, coarse hair stuck fast in her teeth. She vomited. 