From: Kritika Chettri <kritika.chettri@gmail.com>
Date: 17 April 2014 10:03
Subject: Submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com
Bio: I have completed my Masters in English Literature from Delhi University. I am currently teaching English literature in Cluny College, Kalimpong. My short fiction has been published in Humanities Underground and Eastlit. 

*Foreign* 

Kailash successfully managed to seat himself inside the right plane at Indira Gandhi International airport. Ready for foreign. Quite a feat since he had never even seen an airport before forget travelling by flight. All of Dhan Bahadur’s instructions  had proved completely futile. It dawned on him that the fellow himself had never seen an airport before. Just then the phone rang while the voice from somewhere inside was instructing them to switch off all mobiles. 

Kailash came from *paari*. *Paari *had a wide variety of names distinguishing one region from the other, like Suruk, Samthar, Lolay, but from Kalimpong it was just a series of hills covered in thick forest mass. So *paari* or things that belonged to the other side of the river Teesta. 

He had always been an enterprising fellow. A class ten pass afterall. Though fate was never favourable. When most of his friends were picked up by the army, he alone was rejected. Impressed by his enthusiasm, the Army did take him on as a helper. A helper carries goods through the tough mountainous terrain. But this donkey got exhausted after six months of load carrying on the Kargil front. This was no permanent post. Easy exit. 

What could he do? Till fields like his brothers? A class ten pass couldn’t go back to the soil. Neither could he just sit at home. Already the brothers were throwing snide remarks- 

“So you don’t want to till fields? Very well since there is a job awaiting you in foreign.” 

Every other person these days was either going to foreign or had just returned from foreign. Even that class eight pass friend of his, a complete wastrel, was said to have made it there. When he came home for *dasain*, he said- 

“Only foreign gives real value for labour my friend.” 

All he had was labour. Labour that didn’t need any skills at all. If only foreign gave real value for labour then he had no other choice. But first he had to get to Kalimpong. 

A fellow called Maanbir from their parts had made it in Kalimpong. He lived in Durbin Dara under the service of one very big man in this region. Gradually he had managed to bring his whole family under this servitude, to the happy oblivion of the big man. Together they swept his lawns, planted his vegetables, looked after his pets, while Maanbir ran his errands. Even going on to expand their labour. The wife and daughter would often be seen heading down to the highway construction site along the Teesta, supplying road buiding labour. 

A couple of years later these Durbin Dara folks were being invited to his *dhalai* ceremony. He was building a cement house with cement roof and everyone was called for the roof throwing. Amidst local rum (suspiciously called 3x) and broiler chicken they all commented on the shrewdness of this Maanbir. Imagine a busty lad building this house amongst them. The feasting continued till late night with Maanbir admiring the view from atop his new* chat*. 

No *paari* person denied a roof to another fellow from their parts. When Kailash showed up at his doorstep Maanbir had no choice but to accept the unfortunate lad. 

“So you want to go foreign?” 

“What do I need to do? You must be knowing people who have gone outside.” 

“Of course I do. Plenty of my own friends from *paari*. I would have gone myself if it hadn’t been for the family. All you need to do is catch an agent. Fortunately I know just the man.” 

Next day they were heading to D.B (Dhan Bahadur) agent’s house. He was an army retired. Lived in Durbin Dara itself.  Liked to go around claiming what a fierce Captain he had been to the Indian army. But everyone knew the truth. He was no more than your ordinary soldier and had retired as one. Ever since, he had gotten involved in this agent business. 

Supplying labour where it was needed most. In foreign. Foreign initially meant South East Asia but ever since these labourers had heard about the money spinning, oil wielding , lazy nations of the gulf, no one wanted to go anywhere else. Dubai, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait had taken over the old favourites like Singapore and Malaysia. Though Lebanon, Iran, Iraq were reserved for the more adventurous, oblivious ones. 

Quite a few success stories he boasted. The failures too made their rounds around town. Like the woman who had gone as a housemaid to Lebanon and was tortured no end for a couple of years till she found her escape route. Once she returned he was seen fleeing curses (English and Arabic ones). So he had stopped dealing in women all together. 

“High risk there. You never know what they get themselves into.” He said in defence. 

A new party was heading his way. A young lad led by that slime Maanbir( No doubt he would want his commission just for leading the prey. A chap like him would have really flourished in the city). 

Business wasn’t booming these days. Every other person had taken it upon themselves to send people  foreign. 

“Namaste D.B. *daju*, this is Kailash. He wants to go foreign. Very hardworking chap. Just came from my busty.” 

“Everyone wants to go foreign but no one has the money. You need fifty thousand rupees. Does he have fifty thousand rupees?” 

“He is just a busty fellow. Has some land in *paari*. Was hoping* daju*would consider.” 

Of course not everyone going foreign had so much money beforehand. That’s why they were going away in the first place. But D.B worked out an arrangement where they could stay with him, slave for him for a couple of months, years even, before they paid off a part of the deposit. Rest he would claim from the agent on the other side, and of course their salaries. The whole business being sanctified by the great law of mutual understanding between all the parties involved. 

But like any other ex army, he was a hard taskmaster. It wasn’t for no reason that some fled his servitude midway destroying their own bright foreign fate. 

Kailash set about becoming the house help. In the free time, he was allowed to freelance his labour. Ever since people had been flying away, Kalimpong was always in need of unspecialized hands that could do anything from digging fields, planting vegetables, chopping wood, to making hen coops and bird houses. 

Soon he started dabbling in concrete. Doing things that were too unspecialized and small scale for those big full time *misterys* like building pathways to the front door, rebuilding drains, godowns of half wood half cement. If he had only stayed they all agreed that he would have given serious competition to those full time Bihari *misterys *who came to flourish in these parts. Everything that was adhoc for everyone else fell upon him. That *labour* Kailash had grown indispensible to Durbin Dara. 

Here was a real hard working busty lad. Not at all like that slime Maanbir. They sympathized with him for putting up with D.B. too. Poor lad.  If anyone deserved foreign it was him. Just last week during the *dasain*holiday instead of going home he had gone to* labour* in the road construction site on the way to Changoo lake in Sikkim. For the foreign fund, he said. 

D.B. had begun to take pride in the fellow as only a father can. On one of those days when he got enough army rum from the army canteen, he would call him and offer his words of wisdom- 

“Boy, never take it easy in this life. You hear me. Just look at me. I didn’t take it easy, not even for a minute. So here I am drinking subsidized rum before you. Who knows what lies on the other side. This foreign can be really tricky. It can be good but it can also be horribly bad. But you should be ever ready to do any kind of *labour work*, understand. Never shy away. Even if it’s beyond the scope of your small imagination. There was a fellow once. Just like you. I’m forgetting his name now. I only sent him there and brought him back , within two months. He couldn’t do a simple thing like throw live chicken from a fence all day long to be slaughtered on the other side. This kind of over sensitiveness will not work in foreign. Skin should be harder than stone in foreign. You got it boy.” 

Kailash had a vague image of this foreign land. Once D.B. *daju* had shown him a land full of deserts and shopping malls on tv exclaiming- 

“That’s where you’ll go.” 

He had no idea what people did there. Though he heard about them working in restaurants and hotels. But people were always prone to show things better than they were (especially these hill people). They might be cleaning public toilets for all he knew. Nevertheless he was prepared, for any kind of *labour* *work*. Always better to labour there than here (basic common sense). D.B *daju* was right. That chicken fellow was an idiot. 

“Dubai is in your destiny boy. Don’t forget to thank God for all these lazy *sheikh* people.” 

Unlike Lebanon Iran and Iraq, Dubai and Saudi Arabia were not so alien nations. Even *paari* people had heard of Dubai. Whenever anyone said they were foreign return, they were always sure to exclaim- 

“Oh Dubai return.” 

Dubai didn’t seem so hostile. He could picture himself amidst those shopping malls and deserts.  Comforting and reassuring. 

The passport and visa were ready. He had to collect them from the agency in Delhi with whom D.B. was in collaboration. To Delhi by train. Then flight to foreign. 

“Don’t worry boy. You go inside the airport and climb on the plane. Just like the railway station. Only way bigger and cleaner”. 

It was nothing like the railway station. Fortunately he was a class ten pass. Any lower level fellow would have been seriously confounded. 

Why was that Maanbir calling him up now? But the airplane voice said he was not allowed to talk. Diligently obeying the dictat the phone was switched off. A slight grin alighting the nervous face as he thought of calling Maanbir up from foreign.( If he had only picked up the call he would have seen the bad luck that awaited him in Dubai.) 

Whenever one remarks on the smoothness of all these underhand operations, something or the other comes to mess things up. Same happened with Kailash’s Delhi agency. He managed to secure his documents in time but a couple of other foreign aspirants had not been so fortunate. The police were duly informed about the foreign scam. The authorities had so far preferred to remain in oblivion. As long as the mutual understanding was beneficial to all parties involved. Besides there really was no legitimate way to deal with all these surpluss folks. Why unnecessarily chain flying birds? 

A complaint was filed so the Delhi agent had to be nabbed. Of course he wasn’t going down alone. D.B., his comrade at the other end too was nabbed. First time in Kalimpong history the police from Delhi personally came down to arrest a criminal in these parts. The excitement was beyond imagination. The two local channels that usurped channel V after six pm daily (one after the other), could cover nothing else. Even Maanbir came on T.V. to shed some light on his scamster neighbor! 

This had upset the whole chain of thing. All the way till foreign. The Dubai officials were informed. The Dubai agencies were cautioned. There would be no agent waiting for him on the other side as he got down from the plane. 

After a great deal of mutual understanding in Delhi, D.B. was returned to Kalimpong. But he took retirement from this whole agent business. 

A few years passed before Maanbir came to inform him about Kailash’s success- 

“What do you think D.B. *daju*. That *labour* Kailash has become a big shot now. Has built his own cement house near twelvth mile area. Lives with his wife in one room, in the other they are running a restaurant. *Momo*,* thukpa *and some Chinese. Things didn’t turn out so bad for that foreign return. Did he even come this side once to offer his gratitude? I’m telling you *daju*, if there is one thing foreign teaches people, it’s how to be ungrateful.” 

A few days later when Maanbir saw him heading out- 

“Where are you off to *daju*?” 

“Just to settle some foreign debt.” He was informed. 