From: Hariharan K <harikmail@gmail.com>
Date: 12 March 2014 20:03
Subject: Submission
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>
Bio: Author K.Hariharan is presently pursuing his post-doctoral research in mechanical engineering in POSTECH university, South Korea. Hariharan's past time includes reading and writing fiction. He has published a short story in 'Skive magazine' (June 2009). 



Case solved at Dreamsphere

It was quite a peaceful morning for rest of the world. But, the 9th floor office was taken aback by the morning meeting, when the chief manager explained about an incident between his caffeine rich breaths, which bears no precedence of its kind in the history of its existence. The incident that triggered commotion in the 9th floor is nothing but a simple letter; a neat, simple and humble letter requesting an explanation. The sender and even the receiver cannot comprehend fully the intensity of the request, for the potential damage it could cause upon fulfilling the request is quite unfathomable. 

One may wonder why a letter, that too a humbly neatly written request deserves so much preamble. Well it won’t be surprising if you are working in the ministry of external affairs of Dream-sphere. 

Yes, the letter is from the planet earth, written by a junior lawyer named Rahul, residing in a polluted metropolitan city called Chennai. It is addressed to the chief secretary of Dream-sphere’s external affairs department. The letter received through inter-spatial fax read as follows 

“To 

Whosoever concerned, Dream-sphere. 

I know that an external source outside the earth named Dream-sphere is responsible for creating dreams in human beings. 

A recent dream I had on 29th -30th January 2014 earth calendar date was very disturbing. I dreamt of winning a nobel peace prize. But just before receiving the prize, I died due to cardiac arrest. 

I’m involved in several social service activities in earth. But am afraid after this dream that my social services may be recognized for nobel peace prize and I may die then. Due to this fear, the society is now deprived of my services. 

I therefore submit an application under RTD (Right to Dream) act to clarify my following questions. 

1)    What is the mechanism of dream process? Why and how does it occur? 

2)    What is the rationale behind every dream? How is a dream constructed for an individual? 

3)    Why was I chosen for the above dream? 

4)    Are there any conflicts of interest in the social services I do in earth? 

The above letter altered the peace of 9th floor office of Dream-sphere’s ministry. Soon the tension was spread to all the floors; bald-headed department heads who are otherwise bored with their regular work and eagerly await meeting invitations for free butter cookies with coffee, assembled in the president’s conference room. The Dream-sphere we are talking about, by the way is responsible for all the dreams happening across the universe. They design and fine-tune dreams of every individual in every planet. The mechanism of dream is a highly guarded secret, known only to a select few. It may sound like the story of coca cola’s secret formula. Come-on, let’s not trivialize! These guys are into more serious business than dumping concentrated sugar in aluminium cans. 

The president’s conference room already occupied by the division heads of R&D, production, legal etc around the shining oval central table awaited the president’s entry anytime. Waiting with others were two young men in the corner of the table with their laptops ready to key-in the minutes of meeting. They are from the programs department and sit in every meeting to take the minutes. Nobody knows what else their job is. There is a general resentment against the team, not because they are the highly paid stenographers taking minutes of meeting, but because of their influential head who is very close to the president. He laughs loudly for anything being asked and no wonder everyone else laughs at anyone from the programs team. 

The department heads fell silent at the president’s entry. The president was visibly tensed and wasted no time getting into the point, “Gentlemen, am sure you are briefed about the situation that has landed upon the external affair department. By the way what is the location of this earth-man? Have you traced it?” 

“Sir, according to his IP address, he is approximately 13o north and 80o east in earth coordinates” 

“The coordinates sound familiar, isn’t?” 

“Sir, the famous confused scientist, Dr.Abdul Kalam, who never sleeps but asks everyone to dream is also from around the location.” 

“Oh ok, lets get the facts on the table, where is the dream log? Can I get the engineer’s report?” 

“Sir… actually the concerned robot in that shift has gone on maternity leave. So we presently do not know the exact graphical design of the simulated dream. We can however download the same once we login into the robot’s PLM account. We have submitted a special clearance request to information security department to access the account in absentia”. 

“Huh!”, sighed the grey-haired senior design engineer. Draining his coffee slowly into his big paunch, “In those days, when I joined as an apprentice, each dream was handcrafted, and every engineering detail was hand calculated. The log was here”, he tapped the side of his bald head. “These days of digital revolution and 3D dream construction in computer have ruined the essence of engineering in it”. 

Wiping the leftover crumbles between the noisy munching of butter cookies, the production head interrupted, “But, president, why do we make such a big fuss about it? It may be the first time from Milky way galaxy , but we do get such requests from other planets in other galaxies as well isn’t?” 

The president let the legal department respond; after all they are paid to talk. The legal head, a fragile gentle man with a frail voice and sunken eyes tired of scanning volumes of useless legal books all along his life replied, “Well, the case is unique and complicated. First of all, the letter is legally strong as the RTD (right to dream) act comes under article 341, subsection-28, clause-AA of the universal constitution which clearly tells that anyone subjected to dreams is entitled to know any details pertaining to the same without exceptions. Now, our secrecy of dream mechanism is guarded by the amendment passed in the previous government and held valid by the famous judgement in universal court in the case against planet-Ex034017 of Phardeox galaxy. The law states clearly that our secrecy on the mechanism of dreams come under corporate law and stands weak against RTD. So, legally, we are at disadvantage. According to me, we have only two options (i) drag him to universal court. With repeated appeals for several light years, we can assure that the complainant would be long gone in earth’s time line.  (ii) Have an out of court settlement and ask him to withdraw his RTD appeals. In most of the other planets, we have made bilateral ties and have signed treaties that such requests are never allowed to cross their planets. But in planets like earth, with no commercial interest there is no scope for such agreement and we have secured our broadcasting channel that it’s impossible for them to communicate with us. It’s rather a surprise, how a common man decoded our communication channel, that too directly the external affairs department to submit his request.” 

“which is exactly where I wanted to begin the meeting”, interrupted the president looking at the CISO (chief information security officer). The CISO was caught off guard, for he had so far dealt with minor security protocol breaches like executives accessing blocked websites. He had no clue to handle this major breach of information security and he blurted “Actually our server room is certified for ISO27001.” 

“Oh no ! Hell with your ISO !! How did someone in earth hacked our communication system??”, frowned the president. 

The standard reply followed, “Well, our team has successfully tracked the IP address of the fax machine. Our team is proactively investigating for any potential loss of data”. 

Irritated, the president asked “Can you be specific on your action plan for this security breach?” 

The CISO was waiting for this, “Well, ISO27001 addresses only internal security threats. For inter-galaxial breaches, we need a tighter policy.  I request you to extend my retirement due in 6 months and nominate me for a sabbatical to the Universal centre of information security so that we can……………..” 

——————————————————– 

Undisturbed by the serious commotion he caused, Rahul, in earth was having a hot tea with Gayathri. Gayathri and Rahul, both are practicing junior advocates under the famous high court lawyer, Seshadri. Gayathri was astounded with what Rahul just told her. 

“You are kidding right. I hate these science fiction stories. Now, please stop your jokes”, Gayathri snapped, unable to believe Rahul. 

“Hey, no Gayu, seriously I had a dream of winning a Nobel peace prize and dying before receiving it. So, I thought why not make use of it and I sent a RTD notice to Dream-sphere. I have come across the universal law and RTD act before. Well, look here now, the ‘read receipt’ of the fax from their end. I’m sure they must be breaking their heads over it”. 

“But, but how the hell you know about these Dream-sphere and how did you ever contact them?. No one with any common-sense is going to believe you. Where is this so called Dream-sphere ?” 

“Well, have you heard about ether filling the universe?” 

“Come on, I know that you flunked in high school science to choose law, yet  if you had read any elementary physics book in hundred years , you wouldn’t talk this rubbish about ether. There is no such thing called ether.” 

“Hmmm, actually, the proof only says that our definition of ether is incorrect. It doesn’t eliminate the possibility of ether in other form. Physicists abused ether to cover-up their ignorance to explain the unknowns. The non-existence of ether is like the proof against god by atheists; for every proof they bring about only proves that man’s definition of god is wrong, and doesn’t categorically prove the non-existence of god.” 

“Wow !! I thought you are an atheist. Did the dream change your beliefs about god too?”, smiled Gayathri. 

“ha ha, no am neither, actually. Even atheism needs to subscribe to the idea that god doesn’t exist at all, which is ultimately a faith. And faith of any form only supports god, which is contradictory. So I just left it as it is and decided not to prod further”. 

Gayathri was unsatisfied, “No, but tell me how did you find about that Dream-sphere”. 

“It was simple. One of my friends is pursuing research on sleep mechanism and he allowed me to sit in his simulation experiments of REM sleep study. I was bored and switched on the tv, which was hazy. My smart phone had some issues and all the electronic products behaved weirdly. Everything was back to normal once the experiment was terminated. So I knew that people receive external signals during sleeping, which must be for dreams. I tried to figure out an external world apart from earth, yet in close contact with the earth through signals. That’s where the concept of ether and Dream –world fits in”. 

“I didn’t get the logic straight, yet, let me believe your hypothesis for a sake of argument. But, how did you contact them?”. 

“Ah ! that deserves another sandwich”, Rahul winked. 

Gayathri ordered two cheese sandwiches and hurried back, “yeah, so how did you communicate ?” 

“that’s very simple gayu, Once I understood that we receive external signals, then these must be somewhere within the electromagnetic spectrum, like radio waves or micro waves. I expected the signals to travel a long distance, so they must be weak, but of higher frequency. Then it was a matter of carefully tuning the signal-detector for high frequency at night, when most people sleep and dream”. 

“What ? Signal-detector? Where did you get that?” 

“I bought it online in ebay” 

“Ebay !!! Do you get these things in ebay ???” 

“Ha, don’t be silly Gayu, I even saw god for discounted sale in ebay, you just need to put the right keywords to search”. 

“Shut up, no more fun about god, you just said that you are not an atheist”. 

—————————————– 

The executives in Dream-sphere couldn’t come to a conclusion on the further action and the silent clueless programs team engineers logged in their minutes “Long discussion, no direction or conclusion”. 

Since no one spoke anything of immediate use, the research head started reeling whatever history he knew, a well-known meeting tactics to sound smart. “Actually, around 100 earth years back, our entire Dream-sphere was caught in similar tension when a scientist Sigmund Freud proposed a theory for dream mechanism. His theory was that human mind operates between three states, child, adult and parent. The child state’s unruly thoughts are controlled by parent’s moral policing during wakeful state of mind. Therefore, the dreams are nothing but the child’s state of unsupervised freedom during sleeping. He was very close to the truth and we feared that he might even crack the actual mechanism, but he died before that, may his soul rest in peace for the safety of Dream-sphere. 

Later many people started investigating Freud’s theory. We were again alarmed. But the humans are easy to deal with; they are a bunch of egoistic dumb heads, too proud of themselves. They claim to have understood the origin back upto several billionth of a second after bigbang. But, actually they know nothing. Besides, they have  strong mafia groups in  scientific community that each scientific error by those mafias take centuries to get corrected. We decided to take advantage of that. The studies on dream mechanism were based on brain imaging during controlled sleep tests. They have concluded that dreams originate in the pons area of the brain stem. The pons release acetylcholine which travels to the forebrain and initiate dreams. But their understanding is wrong. The whole theory of pons is but a hoax planted intelligently by our research wing to misguide them from thinking about the possibility of dreams from external signals. All the dream related studies on brain has been hacked by us and we remotely mutated few vestigial pons cells in brain to secrete some useless fluids to divert their attention. The real truth, which we all know is that dreams are actually transmitted to every individual from Dream-sphere through secured high frequency signals. These signals are received by the occipital lobe of the brain and they trigger the formation of a special protein called dreamoxyphloroxene. The protein structure is finely dispersed and camouflaged between the DNAs that no characterization techniques can detect them. It’s the universe’s first transparent protein and we have even won a patent for that. This protein is responsible for decoding the signals from Dreamsphere to visual images for the individual. But humans can never understand this”. 

“Huh ! your brilliant historical discourse cannot be applauded now”, interjected the president. “The humans may not technically beat us, but this smart-ass has chosen the weaker legal point of RTD and we may be forced to divulge the secret as per law”. 

After a lot of deliberation, the president sent a note to Rahul. 

—————————————————– 

When Rahul and Gayathri reached their office after tea, Rahul received a fax on his table. 

“Dear Mr.Rahul, 

We acknowledge the receipt of your RTD request. Your request has been transferred to the legal department and will be examined with due regard. Nevertheless, ignoring the technicalities, i as an individual deeply regret for what you had to go through because of the dream and I believe that it’s a moral responsibility from our side to deal with the repercussions of the incident hitherto executed, knowingly or otherwise, notwithstanding the adherence to internal protocols, which may be debatable upon suitable occasion. Though I am yet to receive our legal opinion, I think we ought to do the following irrespective of the recommendation 

(i)            We will cancel the previous dream and substitute a corrected dream with immediate effect 

(ii)          Appreciating your efforts, we would like to present you a presidential award which consists of a certificate and a cheque worth 3 billion dollars of USA currency in earth. 

As a friendly gesture, since your purpose is different from academic research, you may consider withdrawing the RTD request, which will avoid unnecessary legal paperwork. We have enclosed herewith an agreement towards your willingness to receive the presidential award and also withdrawal of your RTD. The agreement is valid in universal court and any disputes can be challenged thereupon.” 

Rahul chuckled, “Gayu, I was thinking that I could reveal the secret and become famous to make money. Now am getting direct tax free money. I didn’t think that my work of instinct will win me lottery. Our senior should learn to follow my instincts to win his cases. Look at their frightened response. They know that they are legally unsafe. The president claims that he wrote the letter. But look the sentence which runs for a paragraph with twisted clauses, its definitely from their lawyer. Ha ha” 

Rahul printed the legal agreement. 

———————————————————- 

“Sir, the earthman has faxed the agreement”, the president’s secretary announced. 

The president called for another meeting, this time with legal advisor and system department. 

“So, is this legally sufficient for us not to divulge the information?”, asked the president. 

“Yes sir, by this agreement, his earlier request under RTD can be considered invalid. However, if he doesn’t receive his money, he can file an appeal against the validity of the agreement”, the legal head clarified. 

“But you said that his appeal should be made to us first, or if we do not receive any appeal directly from him, then no one can hold us responsible”. 

“Yes sir, I said that and I stand by that”. 

“You are brilliant, your advice that day is perfect. “, the president was visibly happy. 

Turning towards the system department “What happened to the communication channel modification?” 

“Sir, we were waiting just for his fax. The next jiffy, all our networks to earth and other planets like earth have been converted to one way channels. By default all the transmitters can act as receivers too as they operate at similar frequency. We have turned the reception off externally. So no matter what, no one can contact us from earth. I also got the sanction from legal department that under information security act, the network operation control is completely in our discretion and no one can force us to open our reception”. 

The legal head nodded in agreement. 

“This is excellent. Now only one work is pending. Ask the production team to construct a dream for Rahul. Let him receive a cheque of 3 billion US dollars and president award in his today’s dream. Nowhere in the agreement have we explicitly mentioned that we will send his award in real”, chuckled the president. 

——————————————————– 

Earth: 10th March 2014 

Breaking news: Scientists have achieved one more milestone in cracking the mechanism of dreams. The acetylcholine which is known to be responsible for dreams have also been identified in kidneys in a recent study held by a team of scientists in renal institute, California. Their research work is reported in ‘Nature’. Other scientists believe that there could be a possible relation between dream mechanism and bedwetting, which needs further studies. 

——————————————————- 

Dream sphere: 

The research head approached the president with a file nominating one of his employees for the best performer award of the year. 

“what is his significant contribution that you carry his file personally?” 

“Sir, he is the brain behind planting acetylcholine in human kidneys. The humans not only are diverted completely to another topic of relating dreams and bedwetting, but also have made them believe that their previous understanding is right. So, we will be safe for few earth centuries” -- Regards K.Hariharan 