From: Javed A.Malik <javedkaemail@yahoo.com>
Date: 6 March 2014 14:35
Subject: submission
To: "outofprintmagazine@gmail.com" <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>
Bio:  My name is Javed Malik and I have written mostly in development and social policy domain but now slowly turning to fiction for its amazing ability to tell what is real, ordinary andordinary. I have just finished writing my first novel set in the context of conflict in Pakistan and Afghanistan and hope to get it published this year. I live and work in Lahore, Pakistan. 
*Taj Mahal* 
Javed Ahmed Malik 

When we reached Agra, the sun was about to set. Like most other typical Indian towns, Agra also started with series of narrow roadside shops, big and small, stalls, people coming and going, crossing roads, people in buses and outside, people and more people. Everywhere. Ashok took several turns and kept asking from every one where is the Taj Mahal? Everyone would gesture *seedha aagay*…straight ahead.  Straight ahead was actually pretty winding but it took us right in middle of a semi-busy chowk where several rickshaws and hotel hawkers were waiting. “Let’s park the car here and try to have Taj’s glimpse in the final sun rays and then we can return and may be take tea somewhere”. Ashok said and stopped the car. His wife Neelam and I agreed immediately. There were plenty of boys and young men wandering there, in part tour guides and in part hotel booking agents who immediately informed that Taj was closed for the day. “Only those who are already inside are there to watch, no new comers can go because it closes at five. You are already half an hour late”. That was a new situation we did think before. Our idea was to spend two three hours at the Taj and return back to Delhi. Now to get the glimpse of Taj, we had to stay overnight. I had a nagging feeling, already, that we could not plan the day well. Ashok was insistent in the morning that we should go to Fatehpur Sikri first at Saleem Chishti’s shrine where they wanted to pray for having their first child. I knew Ashok and Neelam were now married for eight years but did not have children and really missed them. “We must go to the *dargah* first because otherwise it would appear as if our priority was touring Taj.” Ashok had told me while starting his journey early in the morning. I had to agree. We had met after five years. Back then in Boston when I was departing for Lahore, I had promised Ashok that I will surely come to see him in Delhi. So many months in Boston, Ashok and I had discussed that it was just six hours road journey between Lahore to Delhi and that it was a shame that we had to meet in America and that also by chance where we both were enrolled as a graduate student. So today I could not have objected to him to come to Agra first. For me his company was more important than sightseeing. It was however Ashok who took it upon himself to come to Taj at all cost. As a result we had reached Agra by now and were thinking to stay overnight, see the Taj in the first light and then return back. I still had a day time free for the conference I came to attend. There was an evening event planned at India International Centre where I was expecting to meet my other friends from media who over the years have been coming to Pakistan and meeting me one way or the other. All tourist places are same. Agra was no different. Somebody lead you from one hotel to another you choose due to any random reason, looks, dress or even language. You discord bunch of others. Same happen with us. I let Neelam and Ashok to decide about the hotel. After rejecting one or two due to strange smell in the rooms or too dark, we ended up in Rim Jhim hotel which seemed very new. “We opened our business in November only”. A serious looking young Manager told us. It was late January which meant it was really new to my own standards too. The manager handed over keys to Ashok whereas I waited as I disclosed that I am Pakistani with my passport and visa copies, the manager went quiet and then requested would I mind if he could talk to police about my stay in his hotel. That was not odd. Many local hotels do not know that some visas were exempted from mandatory police registration in each city you are allowed to visit, a standard procedure for all Pakistani visitors. “You can disclose this to police no problem.” I said and as he talked to the local police station and after a while passed on receiver towards me. There was a polite voice on the phone. “Do not worry sir. Sit in the lobby and send this boy to me with papers and I will clarify you in a while”. I sat in the lobby with Ashok while Neelam went to her room to freshen up. After a while, we decided to take tea in the restaurant in the lobby. Two hours passed. The manager never returned. I went back to the reception where now a young lady and slightly senior manager were present. “Sir you cannot stay with us. Police thinks that you should go back to Delhi right now”. The new sit in manager said apologetically. “Why is this urgency? I have legal police exempted visa for Agra” “Sir tomorrow is India’s republic day. There is a high security alert. I hope you understand sir”. Manager informed me politely. Ashok nodded and quietly suggested me to leave. “Do I have any other options now?”  I thought. May be I had. I could have gone to a different hotel and stayed there but what if that hotel again tries to confirm from the same police station. Would not it further irritate them? 

Could I go to the police station myself and explain since legally I was right? Yes but they would ask questions from Ashok and Neelam too unnecessary exposing them to questions related to a Pakistani visitor just before the republic day? I remembered how much after 26/11, we had waited for roughly six months before speaking again on phone directly. It was getting cold, dark and misty and as Ashok moved back his car towards main highway leading to Delhi, Neelam sitting now on back side said “Bhai we are really sorry”.  Ashok did not speak but I knew when he used to go quiet, it was on times when he was really under stress. The foggy motorway caused slowing down car’s speed, with its front mirror again and again getting blurred forcing Ashok to clean it with a piece of cloth from inside. That mini-challenge in a way helped all of us to focus on driving slowly, while counting kilometers and looking at watch that how close we were to Delhi. It was slightly late; when we got passed the fog as well as the uneasy traffic of the main Agra-Delhi road and stopped at the road side café close to Noida for our meal did we feel safe and happy again lighting ourselves with the memories of old days. No one could remember that we had left Agra without having a glimpse at the Taj Mahal. 