From: Sujata Rajpal <sujata.rajpal@gmail.com>
Date: 4 May 2014 19:32
Subject: Submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com
Bio: Sujata Rajpal loves her day job as a Corporate Communications Manager of an IT MNC; she equally loves creating fictional characters out of a variety of people that she meets. She has been freelance writing for journals for around fifteen years and has regularly contributed to publications namely The Times of India, Femina, The New Woman, Deccan Herald, Star of Mysore, etc. Her short story ‘The Loss’ was published in eFiction India. Her debut novel is awaiting publication. 

*Goodbyes Are Not Forever* 

The bus lurched from side to side throwing Anjali off balance as she hung on to the overhead rail with one hand and clutched her two grocery bags with the other. Her laptop bag swung from her shoulder. There was not an inch of space to put them down. 

“Give a few of your things to me; I am getting off at the last stop.” Anjali heard a soft voice as she struggled to keep both her feet down in the crowded bus.  Looking in the direction of the voice, she saw a thirty something woman peering at her from an adjacent seat amongst the melee of bags, clothes and limbs. Anjali looked intensely at the benign looking face - large hopeful eyes, flat nose, a fixed smile on her small mouth, a string of jasmine on the oily plait, and a small maroon *bindi* in between the fine lines on her forehead. 

There was something in the way the woman asked. Anjali promptly handed over her grocery bags to a complete stranger; she didn’t trust anyone with her laptop. 

“Thanks for holding my things,” Anjali said, stretching out her hand to take back her belongings when she was about to disembark from the bus at the next stop. 

“Mention not! I am Suma and what’s your name?” the woman replied, offering her hand for the handshake before returning the things. 

“I am Anjali.” Anjali smiled at the woman’s eagerness to shake hands with her. Suma was the first person Anjali befriended in Bangalore when she had gone there for her internship. 

The next day, when Anjali boarded the bus, Suma had already reserved a seat for her. 

“I have the most interesting job in the world. I count other people’s money,” Suma told Anjali when they met again. 

The two women met every day on the bus. 

Suma was thirty six and still unmarried. She lived with her retired father and a younger married brother and his family. Her younger sister had got married five years ago. Suma was ten years older than Anjali but the age difference was only notional in their friendship. Anjali never prodded Suma on why she was still unmarried when her younger siblings were married; it was not her nature to intrude into other people’s private lives. 

“Anjali, how do you manage to live independently? I wouldn’t even want to work if I don’t have to support my family.” Suma was always curious to know about Anjali’s life as a young career minded woman. 

Anjali would sometimes drop in at Suma’s bank for a quick gossip update. Suma would listen to her venting in rapt attention and would give her opinion in a single sentence as a last word; she was the calming factor in Anjali’s chaotic life. Anjali realized that there was an insecure and vulnerable person behind Suma’s ever smiling face. 

Suma’s mother had passed away when she was fifteen years old. Her father never remarried. Since then Suma had been a mother to her younger siblings and her elderly father who never broached the subject of her marriage. Suma was the highest earning member of the family and was entitled to a free accommodation, pension and all other perks which came with a government job. 

“Why don’t you tell your father to find a suitable boy for you?” Anjali asked her one day. 

“Anjali! How can I talk to my father about my own marriage?” she chided her for an ungraceful thought. “What should I tell him? That I am desperate to get married and give birth to babies?” Suma questioned. 

A few years ago, Rajan had proposed to Suma. Rajan was four years younger than her. She didn’t really love him but thought he could be a good husband material. However, Rajan was rejected by her father and brother on the pretext of caste and age differences. 

Suma mutely waited for the day when like the other women of her age, she would also have a loving husband, a home, a house full of her own children and not her brother’s children who called her *doddamma*. She had already passed marriageable age. With her plain looks and a nonexistent social life, the chances of meeting someone on her own were slim. 

Suma’s financial independence was a handicap in the way of her own happiness. 

“If I were a burden on my family, my father wouldn’t have thought twice before marrying me off to whoever cared to marry me,” Suma had expressed frankly. 

“Sometimes I think of running away from everyone,” Suma said. 

“Where will you go Suma?” Anjali asked. 

“Don’t know Anjali, anywhere where no one knows me, I want to start my life afresh,” Suma replied with a forlorn expression on her face. 

The year flew by. Anjali returned to Delhi after the completion of her internship, took up a job, and two years later married her childhood beau. The two friends promised to stay in touch. Initially they spoke every week, then once a month and then once in a while. Suma called her a few times but Anjali was always occupied in either nursing her baby, serving dinner to her in - laws or in a meeting. Anjali had a new life; Suma’s was still the same. 

“*I vil cal u back” *Anjali messaged her but never remembered to call back. 

+++ 

Three years later: 

There was bumper - to - bumper traffic on the road. The flyover construction on both sides of the road and the increased vehicular traffic due to Ganesh Chaturthi had led to massive traffic jams on Mumbai roads. The gleaming sedans, auto rickshaws, two wheelers, the BEST buses and the tempos carrying the elephant headed God for immersion in the sea, all jostled for space on Mumbai’s clogged roads. 

“How much more time will it take?” Suma asked the cab driver, wiping away the beads of sweat from her forehead with the free end of her *pallu*. The sweltering heat was adding to her tension. 

Suma restlessly looked at her watch. It was 4.10 pm. 

“I should’ve started early, I am going to miss my flight,” she scolded herself as she looked outside at the traffic from the crawling vehicle. When the vehicles stopped at the traffic junction, waiting for the signal to turn green, a polio afflicted girl with a naked baby hoisted on her hip tapped at the windows of cars for alms. Wearing an earnest expression on her face, the beggar girl limped from one vehicle to another balancing the baby in one hand and a worn out aluminium vessel in another. Seeing the girl approaching her cab, Suma rolled up the window and turned her face to the other side. She heard the girl’s filthy nails tapping on the window. 

“*Hogu*, no change,” Suma admonished the girl from the safe confines of her cab. 

The traffic light had turned amber by then. Suma rolled down the glass when the vehicle moved. Hot polluted air was better than no air. Fanning herself with a newspaper, she looked at the tinted windows of the shiny cars and envied their occupants inside. Her eyes followed the polio afflicted girl who swiftly moved to the other side of the road with the practiced ease and sat on a broken cement slab. She was happily swinging both of her legs. 

By the time the cab reached the junction, it was a red signal once again. 

“Oh no!” Suma looked at her wrist watch as if looking at her watch now and then would unclog the jam. The scheduled time of the flight from Mumbai to Goa was 5 pm; there was no way she was going to make it for the flight. 

At that very moment, there was a sound of an explosion. All the vehicles came to a screeching halt resulting in a frenzy of honking. The deafening sound was soon subdued by the shrieking of people. Nothing was visible except plumes of thick black smoke billowing into the sky. After a few minutes which felt like eternity, the whole area was engulfed with the sirens of ambulances, the wailing of people, the fire brigade and the police. The mangled body of the beggar girl was found one hundred meters away from the traffic junction. One of her baby’s arms was stuck to the traffic signal. 

+++ 

The dam of tears had burst open last night when Anjali heard about the tragedy from a friend. Throwing everything else aside, she boarded the first available flight to Bangalore to bid farewell to Suma one last time. 

*High intensity bomb blast in Mumbai. More than one fifty dead. Seventy nine bodies still unidentified. Forty seven missing. Families claim unidentified bodies. * 

The headlines screamed. 

Anjali looked outside into the infinity from her window seat. Fighting back her tears, she once again scanned the pile of newspapers spread on her lap, desperately looking for a lead which could give her a flicker of hope that Suma L. Doddamani, 46 years, a State Bank of India employee in Bangalore who was in Mumbai for a training program was not amongst the dead when a human bomb exploded in the middle of heavy traffic. 

As her moist eyes stared at the wing of the aircraft piercing through the clouds, her mind went back to the day ten years ago in Bangalore when she had met Suma for the first time in a local bus on her daily commute from office to the PG. 

The duo had met on January third. 

“There is a magic spell of number three on our friendship,” Suma said when their friendship thickened. Coincidentally the blast occurred on September third. 

“Ladies and gentlemen, in a few minutes we will be starting our descent to Bengaluru…” The caption’s baritone interrupted Anjali’s chain of thoughts. 

It was heartbreaking to come back to Bangalore without Suma. Anjali visited Bangalore many times on official work but she never saw Suma. Anjali was always busy with the review meetings, training sessions, and project deadlines. It was a mad rush at company’s corporate headquarters in Bangalore. In addition, she had a long shopping list from folks up north to fetch silk saris, *sambar* powders, sandalwood artefacts. It was too much to pack in a single trip. “Next time I will definitely meet up with Suma,” Anjali promised herself at the end of every trip but at that time, little did she know that the ‘next time’ would come only on Suma’s death. 

The clock had already struck one. The cremation was at 3.00 pm. A cold fear settled around Anjali’s heart as she stood in the queue for pre paid taxies to ferry her to the cremation ground. In less than two hours from now, she would witness Suma go up in flames. Her first friend in Bangalore was no more. She would finally be bidding goodbye to Suma. 

Anjali felt guilty thinking of the numerous opportunities she had lost in reconnecting with Suma. She thought of all the good times they had had. A half smile appeared on her lips thinking of the one – by -  two coffee they used to share at a small tea shop near the bank. In all these years, she often thought about Suma - how she was coping with her family responsibilities. Had Rajan married or was he still waiting for her? Was she happy? Was her father still alive? The only thing she didn’t do was pick up the phone and call her. 

*I could not find time to meet her when she was alive and today when she is no more, I have left everything aside to express my condolences to her family whom I have never met. My family, child, meetings – nothing came in my way today, my love for my friend pulled me to Bangalore. Did I have to wait for a bomb blast to find time for my friend*? The tears of guilt welled up in her eyes. 

If she hadn’t known about the tragedy, she would have continued to live the rest of her life with the belief that she had a friend in Bangalore named Suma who worked in a bank and travelled by route 273.  How pleasant that ignorance would’ve been! Anjali pondered. 

*Suma has always been there in my heart, I knew it and Suma knew it even if we didn’t speak for a long time*. *Just because she happened to travel on that ill fated road at that hour, it doesn’t mean she is dead*, Anjali reasoned. *May be she escaped death by a whisker. May be the cab driver took her by a different route. Many bodies couldn’t be identified so how can they be so sure that Suma was amongst the dead. May be Suma was not there at all. * 

Anjali could still remember Suma’s smiling face when Suma had come to see her off at the railway station; that was the last time they met. 

“Don’t say goodbye, never know when and where we meet again,” Suma’s words echoed in her mind. 

Anjali wanted to capture that moment and shut her eyes. She didn’t want to give finality to her friend’s existence by watching her cremation. Anjali wanted to live with the belief, however true or false it might be that Suma used this opportunity to escape from the life she hated. 

+++ 

“Are you crazy? You want to come back without attending the cremation when you went only for that?” Anjali’s husband said on the phone when she spoke to him from the airport. “Sixteen thousand rupees and…” Anjali hung up and went to the counter to book her flight back to Delhi. 

“Do I really think that Suma is alive or is the belief for my own peace of mind?” Anjali could not decide. 

*End* 


