From: Kennith Rosario <kennithrosario17@yahoo.com>
Date: 30 April 2014 16:03
Subject: Submission
To: "outofprintmagazine@gmail.com" <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>
Bio: I, Kennith Rosario, am a Mass Media graduate from St. Xavier's College, Mumbai and have studied Creative Writing on a full scholarship at University of Oxford for the Trinity Term. Travelling, reading and writing are three activities I can never have enough of. I live and write in Mumbai, India. 
 

My Saturday By Kennith Rosario (Word Count: 1904) 

I waited. My palms damped with sweat. I punched the keys of my phone every minute. Had Rebecca sent any message? Did she care that I cared for her? The sky changed its shade of blue. People passed by oblivious of me. I sat there, on that very spot where we used to meet every Saturday. Had she forgotten? She sure was testing my patience. Was she somewhere around trying to see my true self? Anger started to trickle in. I tried to control myself. Tried to think of those pretty black eyes engulfed in heavy mascara, without which she would look lifeless. Her dusky skin complemented her jet black hair. Sporting a messy bun, she always had a huge bag slung across her chest. What was in that enigmatic bag? Perhaps the world she always hid from me. *** 

The smell of the moist mud enticed me to stoop lower. Strike after strike mother kept on digging despite the rain mischievously trying to roll the soil back in. The clouds had trapped the sun. Mother struggled in the soft evening light and had narrowly missed hitting her foot twice. I ran towards a niche and brought a bundle of lit candles carefully towards her. With a large Colocasia leaf covering it, I managed to keep the candle burning. She stood straight, rested the shovel between her legs, knotted the end of her sari against her waist and took a deep breath. She raised the shovel high in the air and with huge momentum struck the wooden coffin with a loud thud. She tossed the shovel aside, bent down and with a crowbar lifted the cover of the grave. I leaned over and took a quick glance at the grave my mother had just dug open. The stench of the half-decomposed body stimulated my brain. I took a deep breath. I marveled at the sight of the earth deforming the body, which was once perfect and dressed in its finest funeral garment. Though the earth had not done its job entirely. The body was still only half decayed. I wondered how much of the soil was bone and how much dust. I would often come with mother down to the cemetery to dig a grave. I preferred going when she used to dig an old grave to remove the remains, rather than to bury a finely dressed body. Sometimes I would see a half-decayed body, sometimes just tattered clothes and scattered bones. Snakes and crawlers often added to the macabre effect of the setting. At first I used to sprint home feeling sick in pit of my stomach. But with the passing days, the sight of a destroyed body would set my pulse racing. It excited me. 

*** 

It was last week that we walked down the street, hand in hand. It was a Saturday. Saturday! We talked on the phone all through the week. But on Saturday all we did was touch each other without any technology. Our whispers hung in the air. The street was deserted. Eerie, if alone, but heavenly with her. Rebecca and I had met a year ago at a summer camp. Mother had signed me up for it in the same parish where she dug graves. I rebelled against it as much as I could. I could not connect to anyone in my age group. That is till I met Rebecca. Not that I spoke a lot to her but there was some uncanny energy in her presence; something that made me comfortable. Since the summer camp, we met every week. *** 

Mother grew up in a family of farmers. When she was a teenager, her father was gored to death by a wild elephant. Her mother died a year later in a plague. She was taken care of by her uncle who was a grave digger in Cochin. He took her along with him and taught her the trade. Mother has been working as a grave digger since. Grave diggers were always treated like the lower caste people. Because of her profession, she was married off to a notorious drunk, my father, who died before my mother could deliver me. She dug his grave too. Walking and breathing among the dead was something I grew up doing. Death had lost its power to shock me. I could never understand why people feared the dead. It was the living I feared. They treated me and my mother like we were inconsequential beings in this world. I cherished the moment when that crown of pride was stolen by the hand of death. *** 

We walked in each other’s presence. Once a car, at a high speed, wobbled on the road, hit the boundary of the footpath and climbed over it, barely missing us. Even if it would’ve hit us we wouldn’t have noticed. It was Saturday. The car brushed against a railing and turned turtle. The sound of the crash overpowered the cry of the driver. Splinters of glass scattered on the road. A wheel distanced itself from the car and rolled away. Dents and scratches were all over the body. The splatter of mud on the white body made it look like it was bleeding. The front of the car was smashed. The headlights were crushed. I enjoyed destruction. Was I sadist? No. Was I proud of it? No. But the sight of seeing something wrecked would set my pulse racing. To see something beautiful destroyed would flood my mind with fascination of the story behind its destruction. I loved accidents. I loved destruction. A huge effort by the universe would be required to distract us. It was Saturday. This somehow qualified. We ran towards the car. Sweeping the splinters of glass with our feet, we made our way close to it. Some people managed to remove the corpse which was damaged beyond recognition. My pulse was racing. Call me cold-blooded. Call me ruthless. But my pulse was racing. My thoughts went wild. The sight stimulated me. It was pleasurable. Rebecca held me. She knew me. She could feel my pulse and resented it. She thought it made me an animal. She hated the way my eyes glitters at the sight. She really did know me well. But did I know her? She always asked me the reason. The reason why I loved destruction. I couldn’t answer. It was an instinct. 

*** 

Mother had dug more than hundred graves in her life. She had dug graves for people who died of accidents, burns, suicides, homicides, diseases and natural causes. From infants to old bed-ridden people, she had dug graves for everyone. I helped her pick bones and place them in niches with my bare hands. They say that all a human being finally has is six feet of land. But here in Cochin, it was difficult for a person to have even that all for himself. We had to dig out the body in a year after the burial. The people in the village shirked us for having such a close association with the dead. The landowners, especially, did not allow us to enter the same school, hospital or garden. The only place where we breathed under the same roof was in church during a funeral service. Mother diligently dug graves despite having been shunned socially. “It is not for them to judge me, but Him”, she used to tell me. She believed there was a God. I debated that. She never quite denigrated the people who treated us like filth but she also never glorified them. She let me decide what I had to make of the bizarre life that we both led as a family. Rebecca belonged to a family of landowners, but she was not like them. She read dark fiction and listened to me describe the things, mother and I, would find in a grave. She held my hand firmly without thinking about the onlookers. She was the third child of the five children her parents had. She was given neither the responsibility of being the oldest nor the luxury of being the youngest. She and I barely talked. We didn’t have much in common to talk about. We discussed books and horses. We both loved dark horses. *** I stood up and started walking. I didn’t call her. I knew she knew it was Saturday. I kicked every stone that came my way. Blackness consumed the sky. The streetlight tried its best to shine as bright as the sun but it couldn’t. I plugged in my earphones. Music blared but couldn’t distract me. Why didn’t she come? I was walking home. Or so I thought. My feet felt heavy. The place seemed phantasmagoric. How could she not come? Why did she not come? I started to walk in a fast stride, a stride faster than my calves could bear. The familiarity of the place pricked me. It pierced me with the fact that Rebecca had abandoned me to a lonely Saturday. I entered a street that I had never before gone on. I could smell blood. The smell of blood attracted me like nectar attracts a bee. I followed it. I could see blood. Blood was smeared on the road like paint stroked on a canvas. I walked closer. I saw. I did. She lay there. Yes, she did. Dead. Cold. Covered in blood. I stared at her. She was lying on concrete with her neck lifted by a scarf stuck at the door-hinge of a bus. She had been dragged by the bus from which she was alighting. Her scarf had got stuck in the door. My ear phones played, “…*when a double decker bus kills the both of us, to die by your side is such a heavenly way to die. To die by your side, well, the pleasure, the privilege is mine*..,” My pulse was racing. Not for the destruction but for the person. I turned around and walked home. As soon as I got home, I fell flat on the floor staring straight at the fan rotating above. I could hear her whispers in my head. We hadn’t spoken much but the little we did came rushing back to me. I thought the sight of death, every day at the grave, had numbed me. But I was mistaken. A tear threatened to roll down my face. I tried telling myself about death. Nothing worked. I could still hear her whispers in my head destroying a part of me slowly. Destruction is what I liked and I was destroyed. *** 

The next day was her funeral. Mother dug her grave. She hadn’t been aware of Rebecca’s existence. But she knew her death. I went to her funeral service. I sat on the last bench in the church. I couldn’t gather the courage to go forward to even receive communion. Later at the cemetery, her coffin was lowered in a grave. The band played the last-ritual music. The wreath was placed. After her family and visitors had left, it was me and mother left standing there. Before she could start shoveling the mud back in, I took the shovel from her, instructed her to go home and started shoveling. I had to bury the coffin of destruction; Rebecca’s and mine. I had to seal it. It is now Saturday again for the world. But there are no more Saturdays for me. 