From: oddfashion@gmail.com 

BHOPAL BEAUTY 

By 

Gotham Mamik 

‘You know why Americans are so god damn smart? I’ll tell you why. They always begin a conversation by talking about the weather.’ 

Watching Raju lying on his back, speaking these words that no else would, or care to, Meena liked him even more ... enough to maybe let him see her completely naked tonight. 

It was late, unsuitable for them to be together. Raju and Meena’s family members and most of Bhopal’s nearly half a million population would be fast asleep. This was the only time the two lovers could meet in private. They weren’t known to be an item in broad daylight either. 

The rendezvous was, conveniently a lake (Bhopal is a city of lakes; both made by hand and nature). They had picked a secluded spot; a marshy patch that wasn’t too hard or wet, beside the still waters. It was the night of the 2nd of December and the 3rd was approaching. No glistening moon overhead, thankfully; nearly pitch dark, hard for another secretive couple or some drunk with a flat tire on his bike to spot them. Only tiny spots of stars rained just enough sight to help them admire one another from touching distance. That’s more than what Raju needed. He had fantasized about seeing Meena (completely) naked for weeks now; enticed by the couple of teasers already offered. 

But he knew, to achieve his childish fix, he’d have to act like an adult, and so, continued conversation as countdown to the moment he was waiting for. ‘Take this manager who visited the plant last week, from, where was it ...?’ 

‘America!’ Meena filled in excitedly. 

‘Shh! Not so loud,’ Raju gestured with a finger on his own lips. ‘Of course America, my dear. I’m thinking of the place, um ... yes, Texas.’ 

‘Taxis? He came in more than one Taxi?’ 

‘Not Taxi ... Texas! It’s a state, stupid!’ Raju went on, his eyes clicking the stars. ‘Even sounds like a big place, doesn’t it? Everything in America sounds big. I mean, I guess India sounds big too, but look at us ... we’re not that big; well, your mother’s ass is definitely an exception, but as for the rest ...’ 

He stopped speaking as soon as he turned and saw Meena wasn’t listening anymore. Sitting on the shawl she had brought along, her arms and face coiled around and over her knees; a grumpy ball. Bare biceps beneath her petticoat, marked with goose bumps in the cold temperature. But she was too angry now to be shivering. 

‘What happened?’ Raju reached over but she shunned his hand away. 

‘You know I don’t mean that about your mother ...’ 

She cut him off, ‘Don’t ever call me stupid again!’ 

‘When did I do that?’ 

‘Just now!’ 

‘I did? But I must have just ... I didn’t mea ...’ 

‘Don’t ever do it again!’ and then ... she turned and slapped him, ‘Understand?’ 

‘You fucking bi...’ he sprung up to retaliate, but stopped short of doing anything further. ‘What the hell is wrong with you?’ 

Meena began to sob incessantly. Raju was too dumbfounded to be mad. 

‘Meena! What did I do?’ he leant down cautiously, hugged her. ‘Sweetheart! I’m sorry. Ok?’ he grabbed her close, peeking through the corner of his eye just incase she tried another swing. 

In his embrace, everything in her started to retract eventually: anger, tears, goose bumps. He made her feel good; there was no denying it. 

They had been meeting secretly twice a week for two months straight now. Always sneaking out at these ungodly hours when Raju didn’t have the night shift at the Union Carbide plant. He was an operator in the MIC liquid producing section (he had already explained what this was and will do so again later), and though he had been working there for 4 years straight, hadn’t received a promotion, but was due to be one of the few who would be moved next month exclusively to day shifts; a rarity for someone who didn’t have a wife and family. 

Meena was excited about his impending achievement; she would be able to see him every night then. She had resigned herself to that reality: keeping their relationship forever secret. Because in the light of day, everyone already thought she was crazy for even glancing an eye at him. 

Even right now, in miniscule visibility; Raju’s caricatured on the wrong side of yellow smile illuminated enough of his face to confirm, that he was: ugly. Beyond doubt, objectively, in all fairness to acquired tastes and biases; ugly. Oily despite never having used oil hair that curled before it even sprouted, crevices on sunken cheekbones like exploded land-mines, smashed cardboard shaped nose that boxed away any desire to smell the rest of him (which too was repugnant - Raju’s scent was a curious mix of chemicals meets carcass), and though he wasn’t fat (he couldn’t afford more than two square meals a day), his bijou limbs and nearly non existent neck almost confined him to dwarf status even though he was of average height; an inexplicable optical illusion effect. This, along with his less than stellar career prospects, confirmed, that even a virgin on her deathbed, would consider last minute nunnery admission over priestly ok’ed coitus with Raju. 

The story goes, that Raju’s own mother refused to make eye contact with him when he was born, and would first smoke a leaf of marijuana, then stare at a mongrel dog licking his genitals while she breastfed him; vivid enough imagery to distract from the reality that the antichrist (even though she was Hindu) was sucking on her tit. Yes, if there ever was an embodying example for ‘beauty lies in the ...’ Meena didn’t have to bother completing the phrase in her head. She knew she was definitely the *beholder*. 

They both lived in the same poor housing district not too far from the pesticide plant (Raju now alone – proximity to his features is what killed his mother off the gossip goes) and Meena with her family. 

Meena was considered a world class beauty in the community. Which may have been a slight exaggeration as no one belonging to her impoverished background had even stepped out of the greater district of Bhopal, much less traveled the world. But nitpicking aside, compared to Raju, Meena’s slender torso, full lips and eyes, and skin like grass after the rains, ensured that a match between her and her ugly suitor, was not only unusual, but ‘stupid’ as her own mother (who really did have a big behind) had frequented the term most. ‘What’s wrong with you, *stupid*?’, ‘Him? Are you *stupid*?’, ‘You’re the *stupidest* thing I’ve come across,’ and other phrases crossed Meena’s ears as counter when she had (cautiously) confided in her well wishers: ‘That Raju. He’s nice. I think I like him. Don’t you think he’s nice?’ 

At first, she thought the backlash admonishing her choice was jealousy. But Raju’s critics were too demographically spread out to hold such common vice: Meena’s mother, Meena’s brother, the milkman, the eighty year old amputated neighbor, the little girl who skipped on a rope outside their hut, Kirti - Meena’s best friend, who rumor had it, had already bedded half the single men on three consecutive blocks of housing, even the wise Mr. Dhoni, owner of a small grocery store (made smaller because it stocked too many items) and most learned among that blue collared lot, who knew everything about everyone around the community, had also, called her *stupid*. Mr. Dhoni, it would be apt to point out: was blind. ‘But you can’t even see him!’ Meena stamped her foot, frustrated. ‘I heard enough,’ wise Mr. Dhoni adjusted his always on sunglasses. 

Raju never knew about these unanimous confirmations directly or even through someone else, and so, it was reasonable for Meena to react: to slap him with ferociousness, when he, the reason that everyone had called her stupid, had turned around and done the same. 

Meena began nauseating to the recollections. She gestured a truce, nudged Raju to lie down with his back on the ground again and then rested her head on his chest. The quiet night provided calm. Only an insomniac fish made a sinking sound, thrashing in the lake, and then that too, became mute. 

‘Tell me more about...Texas,’ Meena whispered for distraction, afraid that other’s opinions might come back to haunt her in the silence. 

‘What the hell would I know about Texas?’ Raju began to stroke her hair coarsely. ‘But yeah. This American manager. He was from there. Big guy like I said. His appearance matched the sound of the place. Humongous red cheeks. Like whole pomegranates; the one’s we get in the summer around here ...hey, you and I didn’t even know each other last summer, right?’ 

Raju’s magpie switch in conversation was cruelly misinformed; Meena had started noticing Raju two winters ago, long before he even knew of her existence. Why? She had never bothered to ask herself. But the recent backlash in her life was about to make her do so now. 

‘Anyhow,’ Raju continued, ‘my foreman shows him around the plant, gives him a tour of the MIC tanks. He’s hell bent on impressing the American with the couple hundred odd words he’s mugged up in English, and let me remind you, my foreman is the most non social guy on the planet. He wouldn’t attend his own marriage, even if the only other person there were his to be wife ... because he’d have to talk to her. That’s how much of a weirdo he is, you know.’ 

Raju’s story didn’t interest Meena. She caught the word ‘marriage,’ and it unnerved her, but didn’t let him know. Remained quiet. 

‘What I’m trying to say,’ Raju concluded, ‘is that in my 4 years at the plant, I’ve never seen the foreman talk to anyone except when barking or taking orders. And here comes this big American from Texas, from nowhere. And the foreman parades around him like his best friend. Why?’ 

Raju stopped fondling Meena’s hair and looked at her to guess. She shrugged. 

‘Because the first second they met, the American said: “Hi. I’m Dick. Nice weather you boys getting down here.” And that’s all it took to loosen up the foreman. The most inconsequential, mundane chitchat. Can you believe it? No wonder they rule the world.’ 

While Raju crossed his arms behind his head and gazed up at the sky, still wonderstruck with his own tale, Meena mused by placing her right thumb in her right ear (the odd habit had incepted in childhood and stayed; caused Meena a lot of duress when people meanly teased her about it, even her own mother thought she was retarded for a while). She shoved her thumb into the earlobe as far as she could without inflicting hurt, and squinted her eyes, locked in thought. 

‘But,’ she said removing the thumb, ‘Isn’t it possible that the foreman’s just infatuated with white people in general? Won’t that be the reason he mugged up all those English words? And the American is his boss too after all, right?’ 

Meena raised her head slightly from Raju’s belly to look at him, see if he was angry, wanted to slap her for not getting the point of his story. 

Raju looked at her intensely, as if making up his mind. 

Suddenly, he arose and in the same instant, pushed Meena to the ground, leaned forward and began ... to kiss her. 

His crayon like mustache stabbed her upper lip, his forever stubble marked cheeks, poked at hers, his oily scent splashed over her neck, consuming her, the shawl beneath them, even the damp shrubbery ground under the shawl, leaking down into the soil, infecting everything between. 

‘Stop!’ Meena slapped him again. 

He did. ‘What’s wrong with you?’ she raised herself to sitting position. 

Raju didn’t say anything. Just sunk his head half way down; quarter ashamed, quarter disappointed. 

Meena sighed, and affectionately, but not invitingly, patted his shoulder with her hand to say it was ok. 

Raju lay down on his side, facing the lake, looking away from her. 

She observed his snakelike back; convinced that he would never hurt her. He was just horny. And she had teased him for some time now. Perhaps she should give in. It scared her knowing that she too wanted to have sex with him. Possibly, more than him. She had definitely thought about it for longer. 

‘Raju,’ she placed her hand on his shoulder, but he didn’t stop sulking. ‘Raju,’ she leaned down, massaging his arm with her chin. The water in the lake ahead of them was still, nearly black in color in the absence of light. They could have been staring out at a field of tilled dirt and wouldn’t have known it. It must have been past midnight. Raju’s shift would begin in a few hours, at 6am. His eyes were more sunken than natural now on account of staying up beside her for most of the night twice a week. Just before dawn, he would drop her back home on his bicycle, riding it as slowly as possible even though there would be no traffic on the pebble infested roads, careful not to wake a sleeping soul, get caught and have a scandal erupt. Exhausted, he would slouch at work, perking up only when thinking of their next secret meeting together. 

Meena was now studying the corner of Raju’s eye, which remained focused on the lake. With only day shifts from next month onwards, he would have even less rest, wanting to meet her every night. Basically, he would turn more ugly than he already was. But he didn’t complain about his sacrifice till now, would not complain later. He was, actually, unaware of it. 

‘There’s no other way!’ Meena had told him on many occasions without giving exact reasons to maintain their affair. He never questioned her refusal to meet during the day, where he could forsake sleep five times a week currently. If word got out, the repercussions would certainly be bad for him, but absolutely disastrous for Meena. It wasn’t unheard off in these backwater parts and many like it across the country, for flighty girls wings to be cut off by slitting their throats without anyone ever contesting. Meena had already rattled feathers simply by mentioning her ‘possible platonic’ fondness for Raju. 

‘Damn,’ she cursed herself, but Raju thought it was meant at him, and he finally turned over, like a hurt, angry child. She wanted to make him feel good; it made her feel good about herself. 

Without any indication, she ran her hand behind her back and undid her petticoat. 

Raju’s eyes pumped with life staring at her breasts. He had seen them before; twice exactly, but never so early on in their meetings. It had always been closer to the end; with promises of more next time. Now, with at least a couple of hours to go before the bicycle ride back home; more was a near certainty. He would finally see her naked, and if he didn’t screw things up, perhaps... 

‘Do you want to touch them,’ Meena whispered. 

Yes. It was definitely going to be more than a look. Raju’s knee began to shake uncontrollably with excitement. He didn’t even notice his own spastic limb; his eyes were locked on Meena’s nipples, hypnotized. 

He reached out with one hand, slowly, almost afraid, drool forming on the side of his lip, the thought of feeling the skin around her supple bosom numbing his mouth. 

‘Tsk!’ Meena slapped his hand away just an inch before contact. ‘First, tell me ... about your work’ 

Raju had learnt, and was still bewildered by it, that Meena used to get ‘in the mood’ upon hearing about his job. He would narrate his responsibilities, outline the dangers involved, even the applications of the pesticide that was manufactured ... but most of all, she got excited when hearing about MIC: the liquid produced and stored in his section of the plant. No matter how many times he explained it to her; she wanted to hear about it again, and again ... it was to her, like a fairy tale. Raju did find the role-play weird, but played along. It was easy enough to talk about. The last couple of times, she had taken off her petticoat after hearing the lecture. Tonight was different; he was already ahead without having brought it up. And he had been practicing, getting better at delivering. He knew if he performed; spoke with even more conviction and enthusiasm than before, there would be bonuses. They had already been promised. 

‘MIC,’ he trumpeted, ‘Methyl isocyanate, an organic compound. Formula CH3NCO.’ 

Meena’s skin flushed hearing the intricate jargon. Raju went on, ‘ ... is a colorless, flammable liquid. It is lachrymatory, meaning, a tearing agent. All those silly movies you see or in the news this year when the cops used those gas bombs in Delhi, it’s made of the same stuff. 

Meena recalled an incident earlier in the year: huddled up between her parents and a dozen or more other folk, all of them inside Mr. Dhoni’s grocery store, stacked up like merchandise between the aisles, their necks pointing up at the only TV Screen in the neighborhood. A black & white Japanese box, sparing them the actual color of blood soaked streets in New Delhi, where many Sikh civilians had been mercilessly slain by an angry public; a bursting counter reaction to the assassination of the Prime Minister, Indira Gandhi, by her own body guards, who were also of the Sikh faith. Tears dripped from Meena’s face, watching the domino violence from hundreds of miles away. ‘How easy it is for people to hate?’ she asked herself, bewildered by the news, and was relieved in her conviction that something so horribly widespread could never occur around where she lived. Yes, people died unpleasant deaths in these parts too, but not at such a scale. 

‘Anyhow,’ Raju averted her from reminiscing, ‘the MIC we produce is mixed in with another chemical to form the final product. Lately, pesticides are starting to be produced by bypassing the need for MIC, but this being India, where the word *safe* is akin to greek, nobody’s too worried about switching too soon. The main thing is storing the MIC in these huge tanks, cleaning them, seeing that they’re not filled up to more than the recommended levels and most of all, making sure that no vast amount of water mixes in it at high temperatures; because if that happens ... it’s going to be pretty ugly. So you see, it’s a really tough job, one that I ...’ 

Meena grabbed his hand and placed it on her breast. Raju stopped speaking. Smiled. 

She let him enjoy the moment, didn’t make any movements. His fingers held on firmly around her breast, as if they were branches sprouting from within. For Raju, the grab wasn’t just natural. It was nature itself. 

Finally, she removed his hand with the same ease and asked different versions of the same questions she had already received answers to in previous nights: ‘Isn’t it dangerous? Why don’t you try getting shifted to another section? What if the tanks overheat?’ 

‘Trust me,’ Raju said studying the new lines on his palm, ‘If one of those tanks bursts, it won’t matter what section you’re working in. In fact, anyone within a 20-kilometer radius is going to choke to death. It’ll release a cloud of poison so thick and strong, and so close to the ground, not even midgets will be able to dodge it.’ 

He had never spoken this graphically about the graver aspects of his work before. It was enough to scare anyone, especially in that damp, eerie setting. 

Meena wasn’t frightened. She lifted her heavy long skirt that had a barrage of ethnic paisley motifs printed on it, and exposed her legs. They were unshaven, with scatters of soft hair that one could hardly make out in the dark. Raju definitely didn’t see them. Or, even if he did, he didn’t mind, rather, he liked them. Meena postured herself seductively, her chest and knees now exposed, like a Parisian model, waiting to be sketched, even though she had never seen drawings like it. The cold air pinched at her from all sides but she refrained from showing discomfort. Raju was having an opposite reaction to the weather. His brow leaked sweat and he held out his other hand, the one that hadn’t touched her breast, to caress her leg. 

‘Is there any danger of that ever happening?’ Meena smacked his hand again. 

‘Danger of what?’ 

‘Of one of the tanks over heating and you know ... the poison cloud coming out and all that you just talked about.’ 

Raju pretended to give the inquiry some serious thought, but actually, he had no idea. ‘I doubt it,’ he declared. ‘Don’t get me wrong. Sure it’s dangerous. Some of those tanks are actually in major need of replacement even, with the iron corroding and all. I think management discussed it with that guy from Texas already. Or maybe they didn’t. Maybe they too, just spoke about the weather instead. What you gonna do?’ 

Meena continued to look at him. He hadn’t said enough to warrant hand on foot. Very well. ‘There was this guy last year, worked in the day shift too. Protested about the safety standards. Tried to make it public. But nobody paid him any attention. He got angry. Went on a hunger strike, you know, like Gandhi. Didn’t eat a morsel for nine days straight. Just water. I guess when you’re always half starving already like most of us, the body can go on longer. Anyway, on the 10th day, they officially fired him and kicked him out of the compound. Didn’t want him dying on the premises. That could cause legal problems. I forget what happened to him. Maybe he died. Or moved away. Who knows.’ 

After Meena let Raju massage her leg; it took only three or four up and down rapid movements for Raju to orgasm. ‘Ahhh,’ his moan was concise, just how Meena’s girlfriend, Karti, the only one in their age group who had seen a penis (‘Dozens!’ she had boasted) and touched it, had described. ‘You just shake it for a few seconds, a couple of minutes at most ... don’t even have to worry about making it hard first; that’s the easy part. They key is to let go after it bursts,’ Karti had cautioned. ‘And then make sure to watch the guy’s face: like a dog just before dying. Hilarious.’ 

At that moment, Raju, with gaping mouth, tongue to the side, eyes dilated, did look like a mongrel awaiting an angel to carry him up into the heavens, but one thing was odd: Raju’s *thing* was still very much inside his pants. Neither she nor he had even touched it. It’s as if Raju had telepathically made Meena’s leg into his organ; and just by massaging her calve, his grip extending up the break behind her knee, up and down, down and up, a leak had sprung elsewhere. ‘I have a lot to learn about sex,’ Meena reminded herself quietly. 

‘I love you,’ Raju planked his head onto her thigh, exhausted. 

Meena speculated the just past incident forward, and it pulled her back: a week before, in a similar moment of arousal, but without orgasm, because there was no breast to look up ar and no leg to shake down, Raju had said, ‘The main thing is, if one of the tanks overheats ... it could spring a leak in a different tank altogether. And the bursting could happen in an area no one would have thought to look in the first place.’ 

The pesticide plant where Raju worked had the same mechanics of sex: she was sure off it. Just replace the tanks with legs and penises, and viola. Pressure of bursting existed in both places. This was of course her own reasoning: a way to understand her own unusual accent to arousal, why she used to get excited: by danger, or, mainly the idea of it. Raju’s job - the perils it posed, but assurance in knowing that no self respecting multinational company with thousands of employees would hire an idiot like him without having taken the necessary precautions; just like sneaking out at night, but not running away and eventually getting caught and punished, letting on just enough into others ears about her likeness for Raju so as to invite their scorn, but not their wrath. 

Meena certainly had a lot to learn about sex. Like Raju, like many other unmarried twenty something’s (except promiscuous Karti) in the vicinity from overcrowded and underfed homes, she was a virgin. But the fetish of perceived danger, was her own private indulgence. 

‘Will you take off your skirt now?’ Raju had awakened from his happy nap, and was hoping for the evening to end at a higher note than already ever imagined. 

‘Don’t you think we’ve had enough fun for the night?’ she patted his oil and sweat soaked hair; the stench from it even sent the night bugs on the ground clamoring for safety. 

Raju looked up at her, with his pathetic hollow sunken eyes, pleadingly. 

‘Oh all right,’ she gave in, and stood up. 

Excitedly, Raju sat cross-legged on the floor; a pupil about to receive his lesson. 

Meena didn’t bother to make a show out of it. She didn’t know how. Gyrations, a slow dance, thrusting her hips while humming a dance number in her head, studiously mimicking the reigning queen of Bollywood: Sridevi. 

She had seen a movie just last week starring the actress in question, who had been rightfully nicknamed *Thunder Thighs *by the public. Her parents had regretted the decision; taking an hour long bus ride to the nearest cinema hall, once inside, sitting amidst testosterone inventoried men, each of them tearing their ticket stubs to shreds with excitement whenever Sridevi appeared on the screen, exhibiting her below navel assets, setting off high fevers in every man watching; the cure would only come through cheers, screams, and of course, for many, the dying dog exhale. In the darkness of the hall, man got a free pass to return to roots: act like an animal. 

Meena wasn’t a man and wasn’t inside a cinema hall now, but in the darkness that surrounded her, these open spaces of lake and greenery could very well be her stage, and an opportunity to explore carnal instincts. She didn’t need to try to look half as good as Sridevi’s thighs; to Raju, Meena was his whole and only object of affection. 

‘Are you ready?’ Meena cautioned her admirer, afraid that she might give him a heart attack based on his leg rubbing reaction from moments ago. 

But Raju didn’t back off. His eyes gleamed like the thousands of tiny stars above, the only entities who were observing the couple on the ground at this time. Raju knew he wanted to see her naked more than anything else in the world. Just like he didn’t know that he was ugly. His ignorance about his misfortune was his greatest strength. 

Perhaps that is why Meena loved him. Or was it because he was the only one who never criticized her for shoving her thumb in her ear when in thought. He didn’t even find the practice odd, while everyone else labeled it reprehensible. She was even doing it the first time he approached her and said, ‘Hello. What are you doing?’ 

‘I’m thinking,’ she hadadmitted nervously. 

‘Nice,’ he had replied. ‘I mean. You look very nice.’ 

They were right for each other. She was too good for him, and he only thought good of her. He was the only thing that could keep her from feeling: ugly. Which, in reality, and inexplicably, is what she thought herself to be. But by being aware of Raju’s ugliness ... she could forget her own. Evade the futile danger of looking at herself in the mirror. Consistently live in a dream by focusing on Raju, not herself. Knowing she would be more beautiful than him, always. 

‘Ok,’ Meena declared like a prom queen, and pulled down her skirt while closing her eyes. Standing above the open ground, aware of what her own body looked like to herself, she was anxious to find out what it looked like to Raju. Actually, she was certain that he would adore it, worship it, without seeing the flaws: the slight protrusion of fat around her waist, the bow shaped legs, the odd configuration of her pubic hair ... Raju would look through all that, and see ... beauty. She kept her eyes closed. Waited for him to go ‘wow’, to exhale like he had earlier, for his knee to shake, to whistle like the men in the cinema hall, to hear his head drop on the hard dirt after fainting, or a big splash in the lake because he couldn’t control his excitement and had to jump in, for him to strike her because she was so gorgeous, that it hurt... silence. She heard nothing. With her eyes closed, her body bare, the real darkness was now terrifying. And then, it came ... from afar, a sound she hadn’t expected. A sound she didn’t recognize... 

When she opened her eyes, the emergency siren from the plant was still playing. It had overtaken the silence; substituted it. The plant was a good 5 miles away; the people right near to it, her family, friends, blind Mr. Dhoni, slutty Karti, everyone must have been going deaf with the sheer screeching, constant decibel, the kind from the flashing beacons on those old cop cars, but much, much louder. But she was wrong. They weren’t going deaf. They were dying, or already dead. And she couldn’t hear the screams of the rest of the town folk on the ground as the cloud of poison filled their lungs, bashing their organs inside out. The siren wasn’t a warning: it was a funeral bugle. 

The carnage was already underway. Thousands in the next few hours would be dead or dying. Men, women, children, dogs, even the fish in the lakes would float upside down. The lakes would overflow in the morning with thousands of bodies dumped into them, a mass funeral to prevent spreading of the poison. Trees that had towered over the ground for hundreds of years would lie to their side. 

Raju wasn’t looking at Meena when she opened her eyes. He was staring out past her, looking through her, at the poison leaking from the plant, leaking into the atmosphere inches above their feet, heading toward them. Meena would be one of the lucky few to survive the world’s worst industrial disaster in Bhopal during the early hours of Dec 4th 1984. But like many of the inflicted, the MIC (she’d never forget what it was or what it could do from then on) tearing agent along with other chemicals would sear her insides, make her hair fall in patches, nearly ravage her liver and kidneys. Her skin would rust like dry, untilled dirt. She would never bear a living child because stillbirth rates would increase by 300% in the area with the prolonged infections. And those from the community that would have children would confine their kin to a life of respiratory diseases in hospital beds. Courts would fill up for decades to come, prosecutors holding the international management accountable, would accomplish little. Reduced to discussing the weather. The plant disaster in Bhopal was bigger than any assassination reaction to community in New Delhi she thought she was safe from; this was extermination without bias. Paralyzed with fear and unknowing, Meena turned around to see the poisonous cloud in the distance. She placed her thumb in her right ear, and thought hard about what it was going to be like to be ugly, forever. 

# 