From: Jacquelyn Schneller <jhakimarie@gmail.com>
Date: 4 August 2014 18:14
Subject: SUBMISSION
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com
Bio: Jhaki is an accidental teacher by trade and an artist and writer by otherwise. Her birthplace in the Midwest was a conservative start to a life of wander. She’s recently settled down and commutes between Sweden and South Dakota. Her artwork or stories have appear in *Grey Sparrow Journal * (1st prize for Fiction-2014), *Metazen*, *Bartleby Snopes*, *Weave Magazine*, *Number Eleven*, and elsewhere. Her artwork and a complete list of publications can be found at www.jhakijhaki.com. 

Cow First 


by Jhaki M.S. Landgrebe 

Not so deep in an Indian jungle, just outside the thick, technological tangle of Hyderabad there was a girl in a world, worlds away, in a room with no windows. 

“You’re so brave.” 

I wasn’t. 

Upon hearing of him: “Oh! It’s nice you have someone with you.” 

I didn’t. 

One look at him—through him—and it was clear, he had long since left me. Hardly a chauffeur, his singing, shuffling, disregarding flesh-body came along for the ride. His beautiful mind did, too. Just not with me. Not with me and certainly not for me or my comfort. 

We arrived late, our first night in India. I’ll spare you all the saris, lost luggage, and tickling nose hairs: it was dark and it was India. A taxi was ready, hired by our university babysitters. We even had signs. One for him, *Jack*, and one for me, *me*. It was an easy and safe transport, I realized later. 

We bumped into the jungle campus described as, ‘outside the city’. Outside, despite several sprawling villages, each six times my hometown, webbing, clawing and poking our campus into the city. The taxi puttered Jack to his residence and three to four presently indistinguishable paths away, me to mine. 

There were no windows in mine. There were geckos in both. Daily bombs signaled the working day. The explosions, the deeply sincere housekeeper eventually, and repeatedly, reassured were ‘harmless explosions’ from the nearby rock-exploding-for-other-uses site. The site had a name. It escaped me. The rock did, too. Granite?  Slate? Sandstone? It didn’t matter. I got used to them. But, I never thought of them first as granite blasts. They were always bombs, bombs, bombs—and then and only then, innocent, controlled, exploding rock. *How nice.* 

Eventually, there was a bomb in the city. Actually, there were three. Don’t worry for me. I was trains away that day. We traveled more than studied. 

I only heard of the bombs, in words. I didn’t hear the detonation, in boom, that killed so many of my temporary neighbors. Had I heard the bombs, I would have, after the routine 

three-count hesitations, pegged them as erupting stone. 

We trained back a few days after the news. We played it tough. At least I was playing. I was not myself nor in myself.  I was a shifting, gliding, floating, wanting, needing, suffering, [somehow] smiling, self, drinking tea. *Always drinking tea*. 

Days later it dawned on me, as subtle as rock bombs that my cool had cracked. Unfortunately, the dawning disregarded her namesake. For I awoke before it, at 2:00 am deeply maimed and suddenly realizing it. I’d lost my safety and my mind and now I knew it. I needed a doctor but barely had a musician and he lived three or four still indistinguishable paths away. 

As I stepped, an innocent, American farm girl, through the blackest of nights, terror kicked in two snarled paths too late. I was out, and back was no way to go. There were no lights on the path, only the charming glow of my Nokia phone-brick lighting, not my path, but my dirty leather-choked toes and their immediate landing strip. My feet milked their spotlight and I didn’t take my eyes off of them. 

Panic swelled in my chest, but my ball, soul, toe regimen was controlled. St-e-p. St-e-p. It was controlled until one sound, whatever it was or whatever it dressed itself as in that terrorized brain of mine, sounded. And so, my feet were the last to lose it. I picked up, not speed, but shake. Blackness fore and back. I lurched and wobbled as night upon night swirled around and somehow through my stagger. Perhaps I was walking normally and the night, regular, only stood dark and still. 

And then a crash. A crash, soft and warm. Nose and lips first. Then palms. I squeezed the ground of my fall and it answered. And as the ground began to move from beneath me, I saw his face. Two black eyes, looking for me, I saw past it, through it to the rest of his life. I said goodbye to the face then through the face and prepared myself as Earth’s dinner. 

It shifted, once more. Ever so slightly. Never opening as I expected. Its warmth resuscitated my senses enough to feel the brick clutched in my palm. I shined its beady light on my ground, my crash, my end. 

The end I crashed into was as black as my windowless room, as black as the night I walked, and so I walked into it.  But it was warmer and hairier. I skimmed its haunches, from sloping lumbar to striking hipbones. I returned my face, hands, and chest back to where they’d fallen, back into my proud and sturdy fur-cloud and for a moment I stopped shifting, gliding, floating, wanting, needing, or suffering. I was me inside myself again. And as the water buffalo trudged in a slower version of my way, st-e-p, st-e-p, st-e-p, I recognized the stance I’d never lost, turned towards home and matched her trudge, two paths from which I came. 

I pulled up my unnecessary sheet, closed my eyes and saw nothing. As dawn broke, so did the boulders nearby. I was sure of it. Though, there were no windows. 

END 