From: Bindu John <bindjohn@gmail.com>
Date: 16 August 2014 23:42
Subject: Submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com


*The Mango season – Bindu John* 

The compartment was not crowded. “That’s unusual”, Radha told Raghu, her husband of thirty years. ‘Yeah, must be because it’s a weekday,” Raghu took her bag to keep it on the top berth. “Thank god for that”, Radha sat down near the window. The wind would give her some respite from the notorious taunts of the month of April. She fanned herself with the end of her pale green cotton sari. Radha was looking forward to the five hours in the train while it took them from Cochin to Trivandrum. They were on their way to visit their son who worked in an IT company. She at last had some time to herself, and to do nothing. So much had happened in the last few days…but she resolutely set her mind on the sights and smells of the busy platform, and strangers jostling around in a hurry. Finally, the train hemmed and hawed into motion. 

Raghu called out to a tea – vendor. He was a big fan of train journeys himself; it brought back umpteen memories of his college days. He had had to travel all over the country for the cricket tournaments. The rush of excitement and the nervousness, the high of the wins and the pain of defeat – it all came back to him. He smiled involuntarily. “Reminded of old times?” Radha queried, not without a tang of amusement in her voice. Decades of togetherness made speech redundant. They sipped tea in silence. 

Radha browsed through her magazine while Raghu listened to songs on his cell phone. “Actress Madhu eloped with cameraman Najib”, Radha looked up from her magazine and informed Raghu. “Well that sounds believable of celebrities...” Both grew silent again. But each knew what was going on in the other’s mind. Raghu closed his eyes and tried to shut his thoughts out, but they came creeping back. Finally, he gave in and allowed himself to think about Divya, his daughter.  She said she loved that man, someone who was twenty years older than she, someone who was old enough to be her father. She said she couldn’t live without him,  that she was born to be his wife, his soul mate. She begged the two dearest people in her world to understand how she felt. They couldn’t, and they didn’t. And Divya did what she had to, to live the life she felt was destined for her. Raghu remembered that it was on 5th March in Guruvayoor temple. He doubted he’d ever be able to go there now, for a long time at least… 

The train wound to a halt at Kottayam station. “Look at that crowd, I take back my words about the train being empty”, Radha woke Raghu out of his reverie. Three new passengers entered the compartment, a man of about fifty and a noisy young couple with a baby. The single man seated himself beside Raghu. He had average height, was neither thin nor fat and had longish grey hair and a regular face. There was definitely nothing striking about him, that is, until you looked into his eyes. They brimmed with the light of another world, another time. 

An hour passed. Raghu was getting tired of listening to songs. “Hi, I am Raghu”, he introduced himself to his co – passenger, “and this is my wife, Radha”. “Hello, I am Srihari”, the newcomer said, with a passing glance at Radha. She averted her eyes and looked out of the window. “So where are you traveling to”? Raghu continued. “Kollam”, Srihari said with a smile. 

“Are you working there?” Raghu had nothing else to do anyway. “Yes, I teach at TKM Engineering college”, Srihari replied, his eyes lighting up like stars. There was silence once again. 

It was broken by the baby. It was wailing loudly, inconsolable by the stuffed animal, which looked like a giraffe. The mother looked about twenty and clearly didn’t know what to do. She finally managed to tempt the baby with a biscuit and all was quiet again. 

“What if I had gone ahead with it? Would it have been drastically life – changing? Would I have been happier? Would my children be happier?” A thousand questions loomed up in her head. Questions that she had managed to lock up and guard so far. Questions that darted in and out of Radha’s head so violently that it paralyzed her. She didn’t dare shake her head or something would tumble out onto the floor for everyone to see. 

Vivid images swam before her eyes. Sneaking out of her house on Sunday afternoons to meet him at the mango orchard, sitting under the mango tree and laughing about the silliest of things. Those mangoes tasted sweeter than anything she had ever tasted.  It was as if the gods had gone overboard with their culinary skills and had come up with the best to please all creation. She remembered letting him play the fool with the pallu of her half – saree, making eyes at each other seated on two ends of the table at the public library. The first time that he told her that he loved her, she had looked into his eyes and felt sure that she felt the same. It was not so often that she felt sure about things. She couldn’t even decide which sari to wear or which subject to study. But she loved him. That was the one thing she knew without a doubt. She felt as if that decision had already been made for her in this lifetime. 

But a girl from a conservative family like hers wasn’t allowed to make decisions. She was soon married off into a ‘respectable’ family, to a ‘suitable boy’ with a steady income. And that meant the end of her dreamy Sunday afternoons. Radha learnt to stay away from mangoes. She moved on. Everything else was firmly put away to gather dust in the darkest corner of her mind. Until now. Her mind drifted off to her only daughter, about whom she had avoided thinking for so long. She couldn’t bear it. Not yet… 

They could now hear the welcome buzz of the railway station. Raghu looked up at Srihari who got up with a nod and a smile. There was a heavy onslaught of passengers at Kollam. Raghu and Radha watched Srihari merge into the crowd. When the train started leaving the station, Radha caught a glimpse of black leather shining on the floor. “That’s Srihari’s wallet”, Raghu cried out, “I saw him take it out when he bought the coffee. There might be an address in it”. She didn’t realize that her hands were trembling. Radha  opened the wallet and a photo stared back at her. She saw herself in a red sari, leaning against a mango tree. She closed her eyes for just a moment and relived a mango season from three decades before; and if a tiny tear - drop flowed down her cheek, no one noticed it. She forgave her daughter with all her heart. A vendor passed across the aisle, promising the sweetest and juiciest mangoes… 

