From: Nasrullah Khan <nasar_peace@hotmail.com>
Date: 9 August 2014 18:28
Subject: Submission
To: "outofprintmagazine@gmail.com" <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>
Bio: I'm from Pakistan; my short story Donkey-Man  was selected among the Notable Online Short Stories of 2003 in the Story South Million Writers Award. You can see the ink below: 


He Forgot His Flute 

By 

Muhammad Nasrullah Khan 



Half of the buttons on his shirt were missing, dirt clung to his skin. It was between his fingers, under his nails, on his clothes, everywhere. His pants were full of holes, and worn-out thin clothes afforded little protection from the chilly December wind. His body odor reminded me of an old mattress, and his hands were hard and callused. I can’t remember, now, anything good about his appearance. I think his name was Surtaj Maseeh, but everyone called him Taja. The poor never seem to have full names 

I still remember his first day at school. I was a teacher in training there during my university days, and was appointed there for few months. I asked him his full name. He was nervous. "Taja," He replied. His fellow students could barely contain their laughter, and an ironic smile flashed across their faces. That school was in a richer neighborhood than the part of town Taja came from. He was named Taja because of where he lived and that is what people had called him his entire life. 

His father was a janitor at the school, so Taja was granted special admission. In return, he would clean the classrooms every day, early in the morning. He didn’t mind the work, but the bullies—they were his misery. 

"Hey, sweeper!" a boy would shout. 

"You don't belong here!" another would mock. 

"Go back to where you belong—the dirty side of town!" 

They gave him no option but to fight and defend himself. 

For few days a year, Taja would become important. These few days were annual program of talent show days because Taja was a good actor and a wonderful flute player. 

“Where is Taja? I need him to rehearse the nursery songs,” one teacher would say. 

“He’s with me practicing the National Anthem. You know he’s the lead singer,” the other would answer. And we would see the drama teacher searching for Taja because he was a good actor as well. 

Everyone needed Taja during those brief few days. For when he played his flute, it seemed like the whole world stopped to listen to its sweet sound. For those few brief days, he was the darling of the school. He would be given new clothes and costumes. Yet, soon after the annual program, he was forgotten. The boys bullied him again, and the teachers ignored him as usual. I wanted to sit with him and listen to the sweet spell of his music, and I felt sympathy for him. 

Early one morning, I found him alone in the classroom, and no one was there to see me talking to Taja. While cleaning, he was singing and dancing. As the morning sun spilled through the grimy window, he seemed a lonely figure as he swept the floor. Now was my opportunity to speak with him. 

He looked up from his task and jumped and backed away. His eyes were huge in his pinched, grubby face. 

“Did I do anything wrong?” his voice quavered, and he dropped his broom and held open his hands, as if to show me their emptiness. 

“No, you didn’t anything wrong, Taja.” I smiled and sat on the edge of my desk. “What makes you think you’re in trouble?” Twisting his hands, he stared at me, his mouth opening and closing. Then, he finally stammered, “I—I know I shouldn’t t—dance and sing in the classroom.” His greasy black hair flopped forward as he hung his head. 

“You think what I did was wrong.” My presence embarrassed him. “Not at all, I think you are a good singer.” I tried to settle him down. He bent over and grabbed the broom. “I’ve got to clean the classroom, Sir.” He muttered. He was probably still bit confused and afraid of me. 

“But it isn’t your job, Taja.” 

“My father said I must do it.” 

“How do you feel about that?”My heart ached for him. I couldn’t imagine what it would feel like being like him.He shrugged. “It isn’t hard work, but what is hard is dealing with boys who bull …” His mouth clamped shut. 

“Boys who bully you,” I finished for him. “I know about the bullies. How does that make you feel?” 

“Sad and alone,” Taja said before he smiled weakly. “But I know how to hide these feelings, deep inside. I can ignore most of their taunts.” 

“But it’s not good for you to keep it bottled inside.” 

He pulled a chair from behind a desk and sat down. His huge eyes sparkled with humor for the first time. “These feelings boil inside me until they flare up suddenly… and then… if I can, I find a hiding place where nobody will see me cry.” 

“What made you share this with me?” I asked, and then added, “But I’m glad you did.” 

His small voice was very quiet yet crystal clear, “Because no one asked me before, Sir.” In his bright brown eyes, his inner agony swirled. I was glad he felt he could confide in me; that took courage. 

Within days, Taja suddenly left the school. His absence was noticed because he had been an amusing diversion for many. Years flew by and the memories of Taja faded along with them. 

Then one day, I found Taja sweeping street in front of my house. Unlike the sad and lonely boy he had been at school, he was now full of life and enjoying his work.  I think he had accepted all his bitter realities and knew sweeping was his destiny. After that meeting, we became very good friends. He told me many stories over the years, although I must admit that I never listened well. I always had my own half-written tales, swirling in my mind. 

Taja was still a wonderful singer, often ready to belt out his newest songs And he still had a great passion for playing his flute, and sometimes in the evening, he played in the orchestra at the local theater, his paradise. I had no interest in those plays, but because of his persistent requests, I went to see an opening ceremony of one of his performances. The event began with a soft romantic song by Taja. Applause thundered throughout the theater, and his eyes were wet with happiness. 

But the next day, his spirits were low. His voice cracked with undertones of sadness: “No one appreciates me. The actors get all the credit. No one cares about the real man behind the role. Such a mean environment…I want to quit.”But in the past he had threatened to quit many times. Yet each time a new play started, he was drawn to the theater like a moth to a flame. Opportunity rarely came, but Taja always waited for it to arrive. 

Taja was a Christian living in a Muslim society, and his true north direction was his music. He was an amazing musician, but when he played, he was always hidden from the audience. He was an invisible presence behind the scene. All the applause was showered on the actors, who soaked it on the floodlit stage, taking their bows. While the composer of the sweet music remained in darkness, 

After finishing his work Taja used to come by to help me with my gardening. Every evening he would arrive for work, clutching his only possession, the flute. I love music, and Taja’s flute playing became the highlight of my evening. The moment I’d hear his shovel stop, I’d wait for his magic to join the other night songs that rivaled the most delicate notes of the nightingale. His music spoke straight to my heart, pierced the very core of my soul. 

One balmy evening, when his spade work stopped, his music did not follow. Surprised, I walked across the veranda and along a garden path, looking for him. Clouds flew across the moonlit sky, teasing the shadows. I found him under a cypress tree. “Please play me a tune.”  He put the flute gently to his lips, and his fingers danced lightly conjuring up a magical tune. 

I dropped down and sat next to him. “You play really well. It touches my soul, but why such sad music?” 

“Because I’m sad.” 

“You are sad, but why?” 

“Because… the girl whom I loved got married today.” 

“Does she know about your love?” 

“No, I couldn't. Unlike me she was a famous actress who loved listening to flute as I played it. One night after a performance she asked me to play a love song. So I played for her…my love embracing the notes. After, she held my hand for a while and left. I wanted to tell her how much love I felt for her…  but I had no words… and today she was married.” I could feel the love in his words. 

“Would you honor me by playing the song you played for her, your beloved.” 

He nodded, and this time, his mouth and fingers created a melody of love and loss from his flute. 

It captivated me. I lay back against the tree and closed my eyes. The music was both compelling and commanding. I would’ve followed that music over the hills and across the sea to the end of the world. It spoke of his untold love. 

Those were the days when the horror of September11th was loosed on the world, which had a profound effect onTaja. For him, the war-like conditions in Pakistan eclipsed even his music. The theaters were closed and attacks were often carried out on mosques and churches. 

Once more, I sought him out. “Why aren’t you playing your flute tonight?” 

Head hanging, he scuffed the ground with grubby bare feet. 

“This tragedy of September the eleventh weighs heavy on my heart.” 

I put my hand on his scrawny shoulder: “Don’t worry. The theater will open again. This is just temporary. Soon the shows will start again.” 

His looked up and scowled: “You misunderstand me. I’m worried for my beloved land. I pray to God to save Pakistan from the flames of war.” He kicked a stone and sent it flying into the darkness: “To hell with my music, I want my Pakistan to live long!”In silence, he stared into the distance for a few moments and then left, forgetting his beloved flute. Those were the last words I ever heard from Taja. 

The next Sunday, he went to church early in the morning to pray for his beloved land. In those days, neither churches nor mosques were safe from the terror and hatred that had swept over our country. In the midst of prayer, dark souls stole into the church with submachine guns and opened fire on the worshipers. In only two or three minutes, many innocent lives were destroyed. Taja’s prayer and songs, never listened to as they should have been, were gone now forever, stolen. 

One evening I went to visit his grave, to return the flute he had forgotten. A half-moon shone its feeble light on the iron gate of the graveyard. I walked through as cypress trees swayed in the wind, casting wavering shadows over the graves. A chill rippled up my spine, but I had to find him. Leaves rustled and loose gravel crunched under my sandals as I walked between the graves, searching. 

The only sounds were leaves rustling and the crunch of gravel under my shoes as I walked between the graves, searching for him. 

Then, I saw a grave with fresh soil on it and picked up the pace. I swallowed back my tears. His tombstone seemed cheap compared to the others around him. All it was his complete name carved into the stone—Surtaj Maseeh. He was never called by his full name in life, but death gave it back him. The clear, lilting music of the flute drifted softly through the air. I stopped and tilted my head, savoring each beautiful note. Flute notes? I glanced back at the row of gravesites—was it a trick of the wind? He’d loved that tune and played it constantly when he was a boy. It spoke of dreams, emotions and flying to a place where troubles melted away. He’d looked for such a place all his life. Now, he had found it in death. His life was a metaphor for his soul. 

Dropping to my knees, I ran a hand over the cold, damp soil. It seemed his spirit was trapped in this lifeless mound of earth. I pulled his flute from the pocket of my overcoat and clasped the warm wood in the palm of my hand for a second before laying it on his grave. Now, his spirit could soar, carried by his music. 

I got up slowly, reluctant to leave, not wanting to break the spell of the moment. At last, standing, I brushed soil from my knees and began to walk away. I could not speak much to him; all I could say was “Goodbye, Taja. No one was with you in your life; now, may God be with you in your afterlife. Thank you for the beauty you brought.” 