From: Ram Govardhan <ram.govardhan@ymail.com>
Date: 29 August 2014 13:49
Subject: Re: Submission
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>
Bio: Ram Govardhan’s first novel, *Rough with the Smooth*, was longlisted for the 2009 Man Asian Literary Prize, The Economist-Crossword 2011 Award and published by Leadstart Publishing, Mumbai. His short stories have appeared in several international literary journals. He lives in Chennai cursing the deadly humidity all the time. 

Unborn Child 
Ram Govardhan 

The imminent end was too stark and stared at everyone surrounding the hospital bed. Rajan was dying, yet a tube remained in his nose, one ran through a hole below Adam’s apple, and there were wiry sensors conveying warnings from other parts of his paralysing body. Trying to ease the sombre vibes, Rajan could only put on a grim smile before his face returned to its deadened state. The bewildered doctors and nurses had no more words of comfort, they had exhausted all such words over the last one month he is lying here unmoved. And also because they knew that Rajan had grown immune to their words. When things are as incurable and hopeless as they are with him now, they stay as mute and apathetic as humanly possible. 

Labouring to raise his head, making a feeble attempt to touch Sarah’s pregnant belly, Rajan managed to lip the words, “I want to see our child.” 

The childbirth was months away, whereas Rajan hardly had an hour. “You don’t have to tell a dying man; he knows,” she told herself. Stoically concealing her feelings, she took his hand into hers, and ran belly of his palm over her tummy. His eyes twinkled for a moment and went back to their pallid, stunned state. Falling onto pillow, his head turned sideways; everyone saw each other but he was not yet dead, that was death in progress, perhaps on its last legs. 

Her unemotional face surprised everyone; they didn’t know that she and Rajan had a pact and she was honouring it to a tee. 

A few minutes later, Benjamin, Sarah’s father, reached the ward, yet she felt lonely because he wants Rajan to die, “the sooner the better”. Benjamin, whose mind always ruled his heart, had not allowed the couple into his house ever since they started their live-in arrangement a year ago. 

Hollow-eyed and gaunt, by now, Rajan had outlived the twenty four hours they had predicted yesterday; the doctors looked at their watches, at each other, wondered, and pitied themselves. It was time to pray for a miracle beyond the scope of curative possibilities because divine interventions had saved patients they were utterly hopeless about more often than not. 

What appalled Sarah the most was the utter fear of death in Rajan’s eyes. That was quite unlike the Rajan she knew, loved, and, kicking the whole world, lived-in with. She was seeing an ordinary mortal, wriggling like an ordinary bloke praying god for a few more years. A die-hard fan of Richard Dawkins and Christopher Hitchens, a staunch atheist that he was, this was not the Rajan who loved, explored, and befriended death in all its raw glory. It was that extraordinary spirit of his that had endeared her to him. What happened to their ‘irrevocable pact’ that said both of them must gladly embrace death, that the survivor must celebrate it and dance with gay abandon on funeral day? 

Sarah had met Rajan just over a year ago at the Connemara Library in Egmore. That humid day, Rajan was looking for books on the subject of death on the lift-less, forlorn third floor. “If death is a difficult subject, more so is finding books on it,” he often said. Over the years, he read almost all the books on the subject at American Consulate Library and British Council on Mount Road. He had already read Abraham Kovoor and others of his ilk. And Rajan was now set on finding advanced books on philosophy of death and immortality at Chennai’s largest library. 

At the shelf, he was sweating, thirsty, and, after three hours of up and down the rack, hungry too. Nothing mattered to him as long as he was getting new material to jot down. It was too tiresome for the books were not labelled on their spines; he had to bring every book down to see if it was suitable for his purpose. 

“There’s only one rack on subjects related to death,” said the assistant librarian guiding Sarah towards the corner. As she walked that way, the librarian said, “The shelf is called...epidemics, mortality and death rates.” The corner was dimly lit. 

“Perhaps the shelf is languishing there because of dark nature of the subject,” she told herself. As she neared, the corner was not so dark after all, and she was taken aback for she found a young man ransacking it: there was a heap of books on floor, a fat one under his armpit, some more in his hands, and he was staring the upper ledge of the rack. And then, oblivious of her presence, he sat down and resumed noting down points in his thick notebook. He seemed to have used up one note book and half way through the other one. 

She too sat on the floor, browsed books in the heap, and began jotting notes down. 

When the bell rang to tell the closing time, they saw each other formally for the first time, even though they had furtively squinted at each other several times during the two hours. 

Checking out of library with three books each, they introduced themselves on the move in front of Museum Theatre. 

“I am Rajan.” “Sarah.” 

The broad-rimmed spectacles, full-sleeved khadi shirt, blue jeans and a crossbody sling-bag touching his knees enhanced his scholarly looks. He was too handsome not to set off a conversation. 

As they neared the government maternity hospital on Pantheon Road, Sarah asked, “Would you care for some coffee?” 

“Tea.” “Fine, snacks and tea then,” said Sarah. 

At Ashoka International Hotel, she was not hungry but did not say no to snacks. After she gobbled up samosas, while sipping, he said, “I am studying the subject of death…I see you too are doing something very similar.” 

“You might be doing this for your thesis...I am a medical doctor studying epidemics and causes of mortality in the last century, and death as a phenomenon fascinates me,” said Sarah. She had all the trappings of someone from an opulent family. And she was too graceful not to befriend. 

More than his doctoral thesis, it was his childhood hobby; no one had believed that such a subject could be a hobby. “A hobby? Death? A Hobby?...forget it,” many had said. Even if incongruous, he was impressed that someone so well off as Sarah being is interested in the subject. The more she spoke on death, the more surprised he was—she seemed to know almost as much as he knew of the subject. Yet, his greatest surprise came when she told him who her father was. Jupiter Benjamin, the billionaire whose industrial empire, Jupiter Corporation, was into everything —food, textiles, construction, education, transport and many others that she called, “Domains of human curiosity.” 

“Your father is into everything humanity needs to survive,” said Rajan. 

“But he is also into one thing that man despises,” said Sarah, “Politics.” 

“No, politics is the most misunderstood of all...it has a role in everything we need to survive...from food grains to media to outer space everything is influenced by politics,” said Rajan. “And if we do not get right guys into legislatures; we are doomed to be miserable. Don’t you know, for example, rates of taxes are decided by politicians?” 

Before she could answer, her car driver appeared in front of her with a police salute. She said goodbye, got into the luxury sedan, and waved until traffic made it difficult to see him. 

Over the next three weeks, they met every day in Connemara, chatted at the restaurant and, as the driver appeared, parted for the day. There was not a subject they did not discuss but most of their time was spent on their pet subject. 

Rajan has a human skull on his desk table to remind himself that our bones outlive us, while Sarah has a painting named *Symbols of Death* that shows a flower, a human skull and an hourglass – flower for life, skull for death, and the hourglass for time – in her bedroom. That was to remind herself that no one is sure of the length of time one has on earth, and also to remember that any day could be one’s last day. 

And both of them wore dainty articles of trinketry with their choice sayings on death inscribed on them. 

Rajan’s teens were old enough to dwell on metaphysics. Even as a child, he never liked strip cartoons, nor was a fable needed to put him to sleep. In fact, exhibiting early precociousness, he had casually broached the subject of death with his mother when he was eight. His questions were not about someone’s death, but about the phenomenon, whether everyone has to die, and, if death was as natural as birth, why do we dread it even if ripe in years, and why do we try to defer it with medical help? Even though his mother herself was a medical doctor, she was aghast, did not know whether to keep quiet, say her opinion, or sidetrack him. However much she tried, he insisted an answer to his original question. In the end, looking at her predicament, he assured her that he will figure out all by himself. Even if momentarily relieved, before long, she realised that death was the lightest subject he could deal, and every other matter was not only childish but useless. Whether he was reading a textbook, newspaper, commuting, swimming, or arguing, death related topics buzzed on in the dark reaches of his brain. 

As he gathered extensive knowledge of mortality in general and grew conscious of his own in particular, he began analysing the veracity of rebirth, resurrection, and eternal oblivion, which, he gathered, was complete loss of consciousness after death, while afterlife was continuance of consciousness. The scholarly arguments in favour and against rebirth and resurrection utterly confused him, while Bertrand Russell’s interpretations seemed convincingly consistent. 

However deep were Sarah’s considerations, there seemed no meaning to death whatsoever. It simply meant disaster, and the ensuing question was as to why is man not going all out to reverse this mother of all disasters? Is it wise to wait till all the water runs dry? Must he not instantly abandon all other scientific pursuits until he finds immortality? Is there anything more damaging to human progress than death? 

Rajan had an instant answer to Sarah’s questions on the costs of Adolf Hitler or Idi Amin being immortal. “When everyone is immortal, even Hitler cannot kill anyone. But why don’t you imagine the contribution Socrates, Lincoln and Einstein would have made had they been amongst us?” 

“And if someone is butchered into pieces?” asked Sarah. 

Immortality is reviving whole of one’s body even out of the tiniest of pieces...like Hydra and some other organisms at bottom of oceans where waters perpetually seethe past boiling point. 

“With every passing moment, every day, we are progressively perishing,” said Sarah, “which is euphemistically called ageing.” 

Isn’t ageing the slowest asymptomatic disease? What else can you call it? The long and winding stealthy procedure that unwaveringly degenerates your body is nothing but a pernicious malady. Probing the enigmatic ageing process must become a greater priority than exploring Mars or the god particle. 

Sarah shouldn’t assume that Rajan knows nothing about life, which is, as he saw, a protracted struggle interspersed with moments of joy on the one-way highway to death. Even the few moments of joy are utterly accidental, never man-made, even if one is a stand-up comedian striving to unleash a succession of jokes. 

Of all the characteristics of death, Sarah primarily liked its definitive strength; in terms of certainty, nothing was comparable. And the inevitability of death had everything to do with its necessity that was a result of accidental genetic mutation during evolutionary millennia. Getting hold of the errant genetic material must be the only goal geneticists must be obsessed with. Isn’t it true that the whole of human body renews itself every few years? Thus, undeniably, it’s not a question of wear and tear but a question of coming up with right sort of DNA techniques to increase longevity and, importantly, render death a less painful occurrence until immortality is a reality. 

Afterlife, heaven, and hell were products of overactive minds that lived in cumulative dread of death for thousands of years; so all three were unworthy of any deliberation. 

It is mystifying that the human body that taxes itself so much all through life disintegrates the moment a puff of breath is out of it. Is it impossible to get hold of that puff of breath and compare it with ambient air? 

“They found only a few grams of difference between a living body and its carcass without that puff of breath,” said Sarah. “The devices that can bottle up man’s last puff of breath are yet to be devised.” 

In fact unpredictability and inescapability of death must make life an unattractive proposition; yet, ironically, everyone loves life so much that compared to one’s life; love, god, spouse, parents, religion and everything else look inconsequential. To live, at times, we lie, cheat, maim, kill, and even war despite knowing that we are doomed to be killed by the cold-blooded assassin: nature. 

Man has no say in matters such as hunger, love, sex, procreation and many other urges; he just goes through the motions like an android, said Sarah, since the biological needs are genetically programmed. 

“Also, he goes through them because he knows no other ways,” said Rajan. 

Isn’t love a disguise for genes to go about multiplying themselves? The mutual attraction between genders is a grand game genes habitually play; and we idiotically assume that we love each other from the innermost bottoms of our hearts: a pity. 

Some of the books they exchanged were, *Must All Organisms Age and Die?, Handbook to Afterlife, The Top 10 Causes of Death, Brain Failure & Brain Death, *and* Life, Death and Whatever.* Even before they read each other’s books, Sarah proposed that they move into her father’s vacant mansion on East Coast Road to test live-in waters. That was the sea-side manor her perpetually stressed father visited to rejuvenate himself whenever his empire’s stocks plunged. 

When she insisted on moving into the bungalow with Rajan, Benjamin cried, “Your funeral.” Within days, despite repeated warnings of dire consequences, they began their live-in life. 

The bungalow was too big for two of them and the living space took days to dust. They struggled to remove the mythological murals on a huge wall and the only painting Rajan insisted to flash was the 1632 Caravaggio portrait of an autopsy by the great Dutch painter Rembrandt titled *Anatomy Lesson of Dr. Nicolaes Tulp.* And Sarah wanted the 1642 portrait *Night Watch* by the same painter to be hung right next to it. Rajan had to yield. 

Learning of the difficulties of living in such a large bungalow without servants, Benjamin dispatched four domestics and two cooks and sent enough stores to last for a year. They had one long blast lasting a year; such undisturbable and undisturbed ambience helped them deliberate everything about their pet subject and yours truly’s chronic amnesia is to be completely blamed for reproducing only some of it here. 

As for creationism, if the creator had created life; who is to be blamed for the creation of death? It must have been the handiwork of the one who had created life, felt Sarah. 

“Why would the creator create death and kill his own wonderful creation?” asked Rajan. “In human terms, it’s deadlier than homicide...like killing your own baby.” 

Even if life had evolved, why did death evolve parallelly to negate what had been evolved to live? And the greatest cruelty is to render death unavoidable after breathing life into something. Even the option of propagating your species through genes is no consolation at all, said Sarah. 

Despite all the scientific progress, conclusive definition of death is still eluding us. The boundaries between death and life are thinning. Whether someone’s heart has stopped or someone had stopped breathing, with the advancement of science, the chances of revival are greater. So declaring someone summarily dead in old fashioned way is a dangerous proposition. Even a brain-dead person cannot be said to be dead because blood circulation, breathing, fighting infections and gestating foetuses keep happening, felt Rajan. 

And it is possible to sustain life with life support devices or pacemakers, said Sarah. 

Is it possible to differentiate absolute death from reversible death? Of course science is almost on the verge of identifying conditions that constitute reversible deaths. In the not too distant future, an undertaker may refuse to bury or cremate without a certification that attests the death as conclusively irreversible one. 

Since immortality is not a yet a reality, better management of dying condition will go a long way in adding years to dying people. Delving deep into intricacies of ageing is the only way of improving quality of dying. Soon the number of dying years may outnumber the number of living years. 

That is, vegetable or inactive years outnumbering vigorous years, said Sarah, it won’t be as funny as it seems today. Also unravelling the genetic attributes that process death would be crucial to improve longevity. Achieving a life span of five hundred years seems within the realms of possibilities by end of this century and even immortality may be a possible condition within couple of centuries. 

Before long, death per se was not that dreadful anymore to both of them. It was a phenomenon to be celebrated just as births. And, over the year, they enjoyed deliberating death until Rajan was mortally stabbed by a gang of four while he was returning from library. In fact, even during the last few weeks, they had continued discussing the subject in hospital even as duty nurses watched. 

But, as most of his internal organs began failing, in the last three days, Rajan has stopped talking anything about death. He was in fact talking of living a long enough life to see his children grow into adulthood. And since this morning, in fits bordering on epileptic seizures, Rajan is clasping Sarah’s hands trying to say something and, unable to articulate, repeatedly collapsing. 

Frustrated by lack of success, as the doctors and nurses went away, Sarah stood close to Rajan. Benjamin walked away to a corner, looking composed. 

“I want to live, Sarah, I want to live with you,” said Rajan suddenly clutching her hands as if someone was snatching him away from her. And running his palm over her pregnant belly, he said, “I want to see our child.” 

Benjamin was horrified; the fact that Rajan’s trace is growing in Sarah was the ultimate blow to Benjamin’s ego. He wanted Rajan to be out of his daughter’s life for good and taking Rajan’ life was the only way he knew. He had almost achieved that; his goons had stabbed Rajan to a prolonged death, whereas Benjamin had required them to inflict an instant one. 

Sarah could feel Rajan’s hand turning cold, as cold as death; having handled so many cadavers, she knows the temperature of a newly dead corpse. Their year-long relationship, a whirlwind one at that, came to an end. A doctor rushed in and declared him dead; Sarah had no questions about reversibility. She did not shed tears, did not indulge in other forms of grief, and was not devastated either. 

Benjamin walked away with a look of deep content in his eyes because, by now, he had also figured out a way of getting rid of Rajan’s unborn child. 

............ 


