From: Prashila Naik <prashilacnaik@gmail.com>
Date: 21 April 2014 22:52
Subject: Submission
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>
Bio: Prashila Naik was born and raised in Goa and is currently based out Bangalore. She is a technologist by qualification and experience. Her work has been published or is forthcoming in literary magazines such as Muse India, Papercuts, Bengal Lights, Bewildering Stories, The Affair, Spark, Stupidbird*,* as well as news dailies from Goa. Her long standing dream is to retire to Ladakh. 

Neeta peels off the 'I' in Amit, marveling at how the vibrant color and fragrance that sat in beautiful patterns on her palm not so long ago, could solidify into something so ugly. There are more lines to be peeled off from vines and peacocks and domes, but she lets them be. She wouldn't direct the course of that henna's ruin, she decides, and looks up at Amit's back. He is sitting next to the driver, engrossed in an animated conversation on the food the older man prefers to eat for dinner. She has no interest in such intimate details about the life of a man she has known only for the last 4 hours. She looks out of the window, wishing Amit had let her sleep for a little longer. Why do people have to set out on a honeymoon right after their marriage? She wants to ask him that question, but he will probably have no answer. She looks down at his mutilated name, feeling at once, in and out of love with it. 

The sights outside the Premiere Padmini's window are equally conflicting. She expected a scene straight out of the little Goa snippet from the 'Mile sur mera tumhaara' video, with all its dressed-in-casual-westernwear men and women, their faces bright and flushed. Instead, the myriad faces she sees are not much different from the people she has seen in Khar where she grew up, and later in Lower Parel, where she now lives with Amit and his family. Amit had been planning this honeymoon much before their wedding date had been fixed. She found his enthusiasm touching, but it also bored her; all his exaggerations on how “Goa is the most wonderful place in this otherwise overwhelming country”, rang with an expectation that would never reach the potential it suggested. 

But then, potential was too complex a word to be dragged into more mundane matters like ones day-to-day life. Amit is older than she is, he is more well traveled than she is. Why can she not accept that his expectations will be on a different and a much bigger scale than those of hers? She pokes a straw into one of the Frooti tetrapacks she is carrying in her handbag. Acceptance is a strange thing, she concludes. Probably it is better visualized than experienced... Maybe, Amit is right. Maybe, Dona Paula, the beach where they are headed to, will indeed be beautiful. 

Dona Paula? Why is the beach called that? Amit doesn't have an answer to that question, but he does tell her that Dona Paula isn't a beach, because there is no sand around. Neeta finds that piece of information intriguing, a beach-without-sand. Then, why do people call it a beach. She wishes Amit would tell her something more, but he soon drifts off into another conversation with the driver, this time focusing on his children's education. Neeta follows that conversation till the driver has covered two of his four children. The very idea that the driver with his meager income – or so she thinks – can manage to educate his four children, and then even talk about it, humbles her, but also makes her uncomfortable. 

The driver refuses to accompany them beyond the tar road leading to the quay. “I am bored of that place madam. How many times does one see the same body of water and pretend to be amazed with it,” he says when she extends her halfhearted invitation. 

“Interesting fellow that driver. I was worried that we'd get some drunk slob who would in most likelihood crash us against some tree trunk, and we'd be spending the rest of our honeymoon entering afterlife through two parallel streams, or if we are lucky, on two separate beds, watching each other through dripping saline and blood,” Amit says as they get on the long quay leading to the 'beach'. 

Neeta chuckles. Amit's sense of humor, though dark and often insensitive, has never failed to work its magic on her. All memories of being charmed by him surface, as her arm inadvertently seeks his shoulder and wraps itself round it. 

“Look, that must be Dona Paula,” Amit says. They are halfway along the pier, surrounded by small stalls laden with T-shirts, shorts, and other items of apparel that in all their attempts to look 'cool' only end up looking silly. She looks past those knick-knacks and in the direction of Amit's fingers, at what look like two statues. From the distance, she can barely ascertain their shapes, but she suddenly sees the name Dona Paula in a different light, the possibility that the name's existence can be attributed to so many different reasons, unknown and unheard, suddenly very exciting. 

The statues however, turn out to be hardly worth the excitement. Even as Amit, positioning himself as well as he could, takes feverish pictures of them, she looks up and appraises their structures. The taller statue is undoubtedly male, its features etched to what seem like fairly high standards of masculine perfection. She cannot help but marvel at the long, straight nose, and the sharp jaw, and cheekbones that are so unabashedly sensual. Even the abrupt stump of his extended arm, that could very well make him more grotesque than enigmatic, is pushed back as if it were a mere accessory, the man's face so self-contained. 

That stunning rigidity of features, reminds her of one of her father's friends, a tall and lanky man, who she called Amar uncle. She saw the man almost every single weekend, till she was ten, when he would, literally, drop into their house, a dozen bananas wrapped in a newspaper in his hand, smiling and winking at her, before her father and he sat down near the window in the living room, talking about cricket, politics and many other things she couldn't bother herself with. But, she liked Amar uncle's voice, liked how its vivaciousness contrasted with her father's self-indulgent monotone. Sometimes she sat on the sofa in the same room and watched him, marveling at how his jawline was always clean and smooth, in comparison to that of her father, who she knew hated shaving. She waited for those divergences when he would suddenly glance in her direction, and call out her name, asking her how her studies were, and her dance classes. “Very good, keep it up, keep it up.” Those were the exact words he said to her every time he took their leave, words that she never ceased to find incredibly charming. Secretly, she decided she would marry Amar uncle, once her mother would let her wear a saree. 

The arrangement of the baritone-voiced Saturday evenings had seemed so convenient, that nothing could cut down her disappointment caused on the one day, Amar uncle appeared with his daughter. The girl, much older, was unlike any other girl that age she had seen. Her hair was cut short like a boy's, and she was dressed in lose fitting cotton pants and a sea-green long sleeved shirt that somehow made her look like a blown-up doll. The girl seemed as uninterested in this new acquaintance as she was, watching the living room with a quiet disinterest, as if it were a scene straight outside a moving bus. She could not understand this sudden change of routine. Even her father on being probed on the same by her, only gave her a vague answer. 

Amar uncle's visits grew more erratic after that evening, and on those occasions he did visit, he always happened to miss out on the bananas, or his customary welcome winks at her. The vivaciousness in his voice was still intact, but she was no longer as smitten by the idea of wanting to marry him when she would be able to wear her mother's saree. The daughter with the close cropped hair, just did not fit into the scene! 

Her eyes move down to the adjacent statue, much shorter, and much more petite. She thinks of Amar uncle's daughter, who killed herself a few months after she visited their house, her body discovered hanging from the ceiling in their bedroom, with a suicide note on the table adjacent to the chair she must have stood on before slipping her feet off it. She thinks of Amar uncle who stopped visiting them after the suicide, and all but disappeared from their lives. She thinks of the note which read, “I don't know what I am, but I know what I am not. I am sorry.” The girl's face, all these years later, is only a blur with close cropped hair, but as she looks down at the woman statue, she feels a need to mourn the girl's death, and simultaneously marvel at the helplessness which must have led to it, helplessness which was way beyond her age. 

Is this their story too? The man-statue and the girl-statue. Father and daughter, misunderstood and uncommunicative? 

'Neeta, here, let's take a picture.” 

Not willing to snap out of her thoughts, she pretends to have not heard, but Amit continues to call her till she is forced to turn around and make up for her disinterest with a smile befitting a new bride on her honeymoon. 

“No, stay where you are. That would give a perfect angle.” 

Amit stops a passerby, and begins giving him directions on using his camera. She is worried that he would go overboard with his love for that ugly gadget, but apart from the basic instructions, he gives none. By the time, he walks up to her, he seems flushed, possibly happy too. She looks in the direction of the man with their camera focusing on his closed eye, smiling, when Amit wraps his arm around her waist and pulls her closer. She feels the same sensation she had felt when Amit had kissed her for the first time, a week before their wedding. His sudden action had been terrifying but pleasant too. It had filled her up with a promise of things that would follow. Amit's index finger playfully presses itself against the bare skin on her back, and she is convinced that he would do his damnedest best to keep that promise. As the camera flashes from the distance and their guest photographer clumsily asks them to smile a second after the flash is over, she feels an overwhelming urge to weep. 

Her mind has moved onto the woman she had befriended on her local train journeys back and forth to college. The woman - whose name she remembered to be Rekha or was it Rani - worked as a clerk in some private company in Dadar, and had been saving for a trip to Kerala. Rekha/Rani often told her about the houseboats she had once seen in a movie, and instantly fell in love with. Neeta found this older woman amusing, her thick glasses, and protruding teeth a stark contrast to her dreamy mannerisms. Rekha/Rani lived with a man in his 50s, a man she was not married to, but a man she was madly in love with. It was this man that she longed to be her companion on the Kerala trip. Day after day, Rekha/Rani's life unfolded ahead of Neeta's eyes, in all its detail and color. There were times when Neeta suspected that she was only an outlet for Rekha/Rani's fantasies. In the mere act of finding an audience who heard them out, could Rekha/Rani have found a way to experience her desires. Neeta never discussed this woman with anyone, certain that no one would understand her need for this friendship, certain that she would be ridiculed or scoffed at. How could they possibly know how liberating it is to be in the company of a woman who could with such finesse, share the deepest desires of her soul? 

She does not want to think if Rekha/Rani did manage to have her trip to Kerala, but her own convenient experience, even if in another place, makes her strangely guilty, and spiteful of the man who has made it happen. She pulls herself away from Amit, doing nothing to acknowledge his surprise. As he walks up to the man to collect his camera, she wonders. Is this their story? The younger woman who belonged to the older man and the man who was never hers. 

She looks up at the statues, wishing she could touch them, like Amit can touch her. How important the sensation feels to her, the ability to experience someone physically, a sensation that mere thoughts will never be able to achieve on their own. She looks at Amit and wonders if the playfulness in his touch will persist even after her skin will turn wrinkled and coarse. She has an instant urge to know if it would, but he seems to be so content being in the present moment, that it seems a very cruel thing to do. Maybe, it does not matter after a certain time. It definitely did not matter to her mother, who had once told her that she had not had sex with her father after she was born. Neeta wasn't sure what she would want to do with that piece of information; it meant nothing to her. Her mother's bland tone as she had said those exact words betrayed nothing, no disappointment, no pride, no anger. Even the randomness in their utterance wasn't interesting enough to demand further probing. But now Neeta cannot stop herself from falling back on that single line conversation, trying to recollect her mother's expressions or the focus in her eyes, or even the age she was when that conversation happened. But, her mind draws an easy blank, reminding her of how she isn't entitled to precious explanations when she had chosen to ignore them earlier. 

The statues still stoic, and still alluring, seem to tell her the same, seem to challenge her with their increasingly mysterious existence. Are they after all an ordinary married couple like her parents, who even with startling secrets of their own, will never rise above the generic dynamics of their relationship. And if they are that, isn't it highly unfair that all these tourists throng to this place to witness something so ordinary. 

“Hello! What? You are lost. Again.” 

Neeta shakes her head, and then smiles, not sure of what was said for she has only seen Amit's lips move. If only, she could ask him to repeat himself. But, that does not seem like a necessity anyway, for Amit has moved on to the more important stuff. He is busy showing her the structure right at the top of the cliff from where he said they could get “the perfect view”. Exasperated with his affinity to superlatives, Neeta only nods, and then follows him up the stairs leading to that structure. Amit's shirt which she remembers was neatly tucked in when they had stepped out of their hotel room, is now haphazardly hanging against the hem of his skinny jean pants. More than once, she wishes she could pull it out fully or at least ask him to do the same, but as Amit sprints faster up the stairs, leaving her behind, she gives up on the idea. It simply isn't worth all the thought and impatience! 

Inside the structure, she walks up to where Amit is standing. The sky is a curious blue, but very soon the blue she knows will give way to a multitude of colors, unpredictable, and transient, their beauty too obvious to last as a memory for a lifetime. And yet, she finds herself waiting with bated breath for that display to begin. 

“You know a lot of people around would know why this place is called Dona Paula. Do you want me to check with someone?” Amit asks and looks around, his distracted eye already on the lookout for the benefactor of knowledge that seems to have acquired a sudden importance to him. For a second, she is surprised, but soon enough she remembers their tiny conversation in the car. 

“No, doesn't matter.” 

“Probably not, but it would be fun to know. I mean, it has to be something romantic. Dona Paula, and those statues too. Has to be something romantic.” 

“Or something tragic.” She wants to say that, but she only holds his wrist and nods. Romantic? Tragic? What separates one from the other? 

Amit turns to look at her, his eyes glowing in that brightness to the point of being transparent. Inside them, she can see her own reflection, shaky, vulnerable, as if it would disappear at any point. 

“Let's go back to the hotel room,” she says, her voice sounding foreign even to her own ears. Amit's mouth twitches in a slight motion of surprise, before breaking into a smile. Neeta smiles too, and still holding onto his wrist, she turns him around, not wanting to think of the fading henna patterns on her arms. 