From: Rudy Ravindra <rudy.ravindra@gmail.com>
Date: 26 May 2014 02:49
Subject: Fiction Submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

BIO: 

Rudy Ravindra attended the Iowa Writers’ Summer Workshop. His prose has appeared in a few online magazines. He lives in Wilmington, North Carolina. More at: http://rudyravindra.wix.com/rudy 


Inheritance 

Every evening, an open bottle of red wine and two glasses greeted Aparna when she got home. But this evening no wine, no glasses. She looked for Ganesh in his den. No. He didn’t go out, his old jalopy was in the garage. And he never went for a walk in the evening, got his exercise out of the way first thing in the morning, rain or shine. She where the hell is he? She went to the backyard, to see if he was puttering about, admiring the rose garden. Not there either. She called, “Ganesh, where are you, darling?” No response. Then she got worried, walked into the bedroom to see him lying on the bed, fully clothed. She was bewildered, she never, never saw him sleep during daytime, no naps for him. He was a man of strict habits, up at five and bed at ten. Even after he was laid off, his routine remained the same. Although he couldn’t find another job, he was overqualified and young anymore, he sat at his computer the whole day to churn out fiction, poetry, whatever came to his mind. She tried to wake him up, “Ganesh, are you ok, dear, get up, let’s have a drink.” He didn’t move a muscle, looked as if dead. She tried to listen to his heart, tried to see if he still breathed. She screamed, “Ganesh! Wake up!” But in her heart of hearts she knew he was gone. She threw herself by his side, wept silently. 

The ER doctor said it could be his heart, recommended an autopsy to find out the exact cause of death. But she refused, *there is no point, it won’t bring him back*. 

After the funeral, Aparna said. “I’ll go to Bangalore to immerse his ashes in Kaveri.” 

Her father didn’t look happy. “Why go all the way? There are plenty of rivers here in the Raleigh area, Eno, Cape Fear River, to name a couple.” 

“But, Dad, I promised him, he wanted his ashes immersed in Kaveri. His parents’ ashes are in that river.” 

Her mother said, “Why would he talk about his ashes, he was barely sixty!” 

Aparna screwed up her left eye, a habit when she tried to recollect. “Well, after his parents passed away, one after the other, he was a bit depressed. He’d say, that it’ll be his turn next, being the oldest of the next generation.” 

* 

Her plane landed at Bangalore airport at about five in the evening, a bit worse for the wear, she walked out of the airport to be met by Ganesh’s younger siblings—Santosh, a tall guy with a strong resemblance to his elder brother and his sister Veena. Her faded *salwar kameez* had definitely seen better days, her crinkly hair pulled back into a severe bun. Veena didn’t believe in using a deodorant, her axilla were soaked, she smelled awful at close quarters. They all got into a Toyota SUV, and in the evening rush hour, the going was slow. 

Aparna was glad to be finally in her room, the same room she shared with Ganesh on her last visit to Bangalore, just after their wedding, some ten years back. The same bed, the same bathroom with pistachio green wash basin and toilet bowl. 

Aparna had a hot shower, changed into fresh jeans and a T-shirt and went downstairs. 

Aparna hugged Anu. “You are still the same, no change at all, still very beautiful, how do you do it?” 

Santosh put his arm around his wife. “It’s all the love I give Anu, it nurtures her, makes her feel young forever.” 

Anu laughed, “I guess you have seen Natalie and Deepti when you visited last time. Durga was born a couple of years after your visit.” 

“Yes, yes, I know. You e-mailed her pics when she was little. She is so cute. So, Durga, what grade are you in now?” 

The little girl held up her hand showing three fingers, “Third grade.” 

Veena butted in, pointing at her daughter. “Look how tall Natalie is now.” 

Aparna asked. “Natalie, are you in college now?” 

Natalie bobbed her head, up and down, indicating a yes. 

Aparna turned to Veena’s husband, “Hi, Nagendra, are you still working at the antibiotic factory?” 

“Yes, yes, the same old job, pays the bills, you know.” 

Not wanting to leave Deepti out, Aparna said, “So, I hear you’ll be an engineer soon, huh?” 

“I guess so.” The tall skinny girl shrugged her shoulders as if she didn’t care. 

After everyone sat at the dining table, Veena asked, “Aparna, did Ganesh write a will?” 

“No, no. I don’t think so.” 

Veena shook her head. “Hmmm…Did he tell you about the site he owns?” 

Aparna asked. “What’s that?” 

Santosh explained. “It’s piece of land to build a house.” 

Aparna smiled. “Okay, okay, I got it. We call it a lot.” 

Santosh said. “My father gave him this lot, it’s pretty big, a few miles from here. I think it’s worth two crores.” 

Veena corrected him. “No, no, my boy. It’s definitely worth at least two and half crores. That area is so fastly developing, you won’t believe it Aparna.” 

Aparna enquired. “How much is it in dollars?” 

Santosh took out a calculator. “Depending upon the exchange rate, it’ll be four hundred thousand dollars. And if Veena is right it’ll be half a million dollars.” 

Aparna wondered why Ganesh never thought it fit to enlighten her about his land in a prime locale. Maybe he didn’t think that it was important, or perhaps he didn’t think he would die so soon. Or he simply didn’t care about the property as he never intended to return to India. 

Everybody ate with their fingers, mounds of rice, vegetables, *sambar* and yogurt and mango pickle. When Aparna hesitated to use her fingers, Anu got her a fork. 

Anu, sitting right next to her whispered, “Even Ganesh, he used a fork.” 

After dinner, Veena and her entourage left. Aparna helped Anu with the dishes, said good night, went up to her room. 

Aparna wondered if she should have stayed at a hotel. Seeing the room after so many years brought back fond memories. She felt as if Ganesh might somehow materialize by her side. Ten years back, right after their wedding, they were both horny, couldn’t keep their hands off of each other. The first night when they tried to make love, the bed started to creak, not conducive to passionate embraces. So, they got out of the bed to examine the situation. 

Ganesh whispered, “Look here, these are two beds put together. So, when we move, the beds are hitting against each other, making all that racket.” 

He moved the beds slightly apart so they won’t scrape against each other, they were back in business. 

She didn’t know which was worse, a man leaving you for a younger woman or a man leaving you for another world—hell or heaven or wherever. When Chris, her first husband, left her she was angry for a long time, angry he lost interest in her, angry he found some other woman more attractive. After Chris, she never even imagined that she would love another man, let alone marry. It was not that Ganesh, ten years her senior, swept her off of her feet, nothing of that sort. At best, he was dull, not exciting at all. But once he let his guard down, he was fun to be with. He had a subtle sense of humor, which most people didn’t get. But, he made her laugh. 

She didn’t know when she fell asleep, she was awakened by a noise—thud, thud, thud. She peered at her wrist watch in the semidarkness—it was after five in the morning. She peeped out of the window, a man was unloading milk cartons. A woman, all wrapped up against the morning chill was sitting on a small stool on the pavement in front of the milk cartons, probably waiting for her customers. After the noise died down, Aparna tried in vain to go back to sleep. And then there was a loud call for prayer from a nearby mosque, the muezzin’s voice, “Allahho Akbar.” Just when his voice began to fade, a bunch of devotees walked on the street chanting loudly “Hare Rama, Hare Krishna, Krishna, Krishna, Hare, Hare…”, accompanied by a one-man orchestra, playing what looked like miniature cymbals. With all this cacophony, Aparna was amazed at people still sleeping in this house. Now it was almost six in the morning, she was itching to get up, go out to get her opioid rush. 

She heard water running, a toilet flushed, thank god someone is up at last. She quickly brushed, and went downstairs, just in time to see Anu unbolting the many latches of the heavy front door. 

“Hi, Anu. I’ll go for a jog.” 

Anu said. “You really can’t jog on these roads, so much construction, too many vehicles even at this time in the morning. Wait a few minutes. I’ll ask our driver to drop you off at the Sankey Tank. There’s a nice track around the lake, you can jog as fast as you want. Here, take this cell phone, call me when you are done, I’ll send the driver to pick you up.” 

* 

Anu asked, “Did you have a good jog?” 

“Yeah. It was cool near the lake.” 

Anu asked, “So, after breakfast, do you want to see the city a bit?” Suddenly she appeared to realize that she might have said the wrong thing. “I’m sorry, I didn’t mean, I mean, you came for this, this thing…ashes...” 

“That’s fine. Let’s go out.” 

They went down the road into the busy market area. Anu pointed out, “See that barber shop, Ganesh used to arrive from America with a head full of hair, go to this shop the next day, get it all chopped off, real short. He used say he saved sixteen dollars by getting his hair cut in India. He spent almost two thousand dollars on his air ticket, ha, ha, ha.” 

“Oh. Yeah. Ganesh was tight-fisted. Never bought anything at regular price. All his shirts, pants, shoes, always on sale. But when it came to me he never hesitated to spend. He spoiled me rotten. Insisted I get the best pants suits, the best dresses, everything from the best shops.” She got emotional, tears started to roll down her fair cheeks. 

Anu held her hand, “I know, it’s difficult…” 

On one side there was an open garbage dump, stray dogs fighting for scraps of food, barking, attacking each other. And a dog attacked a bitch and mounted her, having his way. People walked by unperturbed. 

They reached Vidhana Soudha, the legislative building where the state representatives met to conduct the state’s business and enact laws. 

The driver dropped them off, went to look for a parking spot. 

Anu said, “By the time he finds parking we’ll be ready to go. Parking is so hard to find.” 

They walked around the imposing granite building. 

“We can try to go inside, but all this security these days…” 

Then they drove to Cubbon park, saw the brick-red High Court building, and the old library building, walked around for a bit in the park and then drove to Koshy’s for lunch. 

“We can go and see Tipu’s fort and his summer palace, but those areas are very congested. I think you are better off seeing pictures of those places.” Anu sipped cold water. 

Aparna had a big swig of her beer. “Ganesh used to say that India looks more beautiful in pictures, one can edit out the garbage and stray dogs.” 

“I think he is, I mean, he was right. I myself can see how this once beautiful city is destroyed with all this growth. More offices, factories, so many more new apartment complexes.” Anu sighed. 

* 

The next day, Santosh, Veena, and Aparna drove to Srirangapatna, to the banks of Kaveri. Santosh carried the urn, and accompanied by a *purohit* chanting *slokas*, they all descended to the river bank. Santosh, facing away from the river, slowly placed the urn in the water. That was the end of a journey. A whole life reduced to an urn full of ashes. From a loving mother’s womb to a sacred river’s womb. To become a part of an ancient and sacred river, to eventually end up in the ocean. The urn floated and bobbed on the surface, turned every which way before being drawn into the water by an eddy of current. They stood with their hands folded together, their eyes brimming with tears, bid farewell to Ganesh. 

They were back in Bangalore by evening, got out of car and stretched their limbs. 

Veena said. “I’ll go home, *yaar*. I guess this is goodbye, Aparna. You are leaving tomorrow, no?” 

“Yeah, I’m going to Delhi tomorrow by the early morning flight, to visit my uncle.” 

“What does your uncle do?” 

“He, he, he…I think he works for the government.” Aparna looked like she didn’t want to talk about her uncle’s job. 

“Did you think of what you’ll do with the site?” 

“That’s the last thing on my mind. You know how hectic it has been.” 

* 

Veena said. “I think we should do something about that site. It’s not good, you know, to keep it vacant. Next thing you know someone will squat there, erect a small hut. Then we will have tough time to evict them.” 

Santosh just got home from his office. “But why should we bother? The land is Aparna’s. She’ll do whatever she wants with it. I asked her if she wants our help to transfer the land to her name. But so far, not even an e-mail from her, it’s been almost a year since she was here.” 

Veena said. “Since she doesn’t seem to care about the land, why don’t we sell it?” 

Anu brought coffee and *pakodies*. “How can we sell it? She’s the owner, no?” 

Veena shook her head and wagged her index finger, “Remember that the site is our family property, my father worked very hard to pay for that site. In my opinion, Aparna doesn’t deserve it. Now let’s be smart, think hard. How to sell the site for a good amount, keep the money with us. Aparna should not get even a single rupee, she needn’t know about the whole transaction. Very simple, isn’t it?” 

Santosh was dumbfounded. “But, how can we do it, the site is hers.” 

“Not officially, not yet. The site is still in Ganesh’s name. Remember, two years back Ganesh gave you the power of attorney to act on his behalf, because at that time there were many forms to sign for the site to be transferred to his name, when dad passed away.” 

Santosh scratched his head. “Yeah, yeah, but now that Ganesh is no more, is that power of attorney still valid?” 

“Why not, *yaar*? Who knows he died? Not that dumb clerk in the Registrar’s office.” 

Anu said. “But this is such a risky plan. What if we get caught?” 

Veena said, “Who’ll catch us, *yaar*, who’ll know?” 

Anu persisted, “What about Aparna, what if she asks about the site?” 

“To hell with Aparna. Tell her that some mafia fellow occupied the land illegally. I think she’s so rich she doesn’t care for this money.” Veena sipped her coffee. 

The spicy *pakodies* and strong coffee seemed to revive Santosh, he perked up. “Yes, yes. That’s a superb plan. Very superb.” 

Next day, Santosh and Veena drove to the Registrar’s office in Yeshwantpur. In the busy street, rows and rows of big lorries, acrid smoke bellowing out of their exhausts, loaded with huge sacks of rice, *dal*, potatoes, onions, red chillies, spices and condiments, were parked near the warehouses. Men unloaded the commodities, retail merchants loudly haggled with the wholesalers, the whole area noisy and chaotic. 

With great difficulty Santosh found parking, and they went into the office. A poker-faced lady with a big *bindi* sat at a computer monitor. She motioned Veena and Santosh to two chairs opposite her huge desk. 

Veena took over, explained the purpose of their visit. She proffered the documents to the lady. They sat silently following the many clicks of the mouse, clucks of her tongue. 

The lady looked at them severely. “Your brother died last year. This power of attorney is no longer valid. What you are trying to do is illegal. I ought to report you to my supervisor.” 

Santosh’s face became ashen, but Veena was unperturbed. “How do you know it? I don’t think his death is recorded anywhere.” Veena pushed an envelope with cash in it. 

The lady’s features softened a bit, a smile began to form. “I have other customers waiting, don’t have all day. See here, the death certificate is here, his wife took possession of the land sometime back, click, click, sold it, and now, another click, the land belongs to, oh, my god…” She lowered her voice to an almost inaudible whisper, “You don’t want to mess with this.” She wrote a name on a piece of paper, pushed it across the desk. 

Brother and sister were shocked to see the name. This guy was a minister in the Central government, alleged to have amassed several thousand crores of rupees illegally. When he retired, he moved back home and built an empire. He owned real estate, gas stations, factories—all legitimate businesses, and laundered his ill-gotten money. The ex-minister, had an unsavory reputation, didn’t hesitate to use violent means to achieve his ends, had many thugs on his payroll. 

Veena was smart enough to know when to accept defeat. They hightailed it, heaved a sigh of relief when they reached home. 

Veena said. “That bloody conniving so and so. Acted as though she didn’t care, how dare she, sold it right under our noses. We’ve been in this town for so many decades.” 

Anu said. “I think we have underestimated her. She must have some high-level contacts in Delhi, you know, to connect with this, this, ex-minister. Must have gotten a lot of money.” 

Veena agreed. “Now I remember, she was cagey when I asked about her uncle. Very vague she was, said he worked for the government. Lucky Aparna, she’ll enjoy all that dough.” 