From: anindita deo <aninditadeo@gmail.com>
Date: 14 June 2014 14:31
Subject: Re: Submission: Short Fiction
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>
Bio: Anindita Deo's poems have been published in major literary journals like Kritya, Coldnoon, Red River Review, Taj mahal Review etc. Her short stories and travel writing has also appeared in various anthologies. She works as a product manager, and likes traveling & reading in spare time. 

*Manque* 

“Did I take you to the cassette shop?” he asks feebly. 

Lugubrious summer evenings of intermittent interrogation. 

Sometimes his eyes seem to plead for a yes. 

At times, they are lambent with excitement. (Those are the good days, when he is sure he is a good man.) But most of the times, he has that apprehensive look; like he is dreading the answer, like he fears that he has let me down. 

We sit on chairs facing each other, on a portico overlooking the street. 

The cheap aluminum chairs with strings of sticky rubber sag under the weight of our bodies. 

“Yes you did.” 

“Often.” I add. 

“And what would you buy?” He smiles a smile that is a grimace. 

“Mostly boy bands, Backstreet boys, Westlife. Later Sting, Clapton and U2. I’d listen to All that you can’t leave behind on loop. Especially that song, Kite.” 

He is staring at me. Searching my face for a hint, for a stray memory. 

The over sized white shirt he is wearing glows in the dying dusk light. He thumbs the yellowing pages of an ancient notebook lying on his lap. He calls it the Book of Laughter and Forgetting. 

“Kite”, he has scribbled in his shaky, snaking hand. Followed by a resolute full stop. 

I examine the light trapped in his wrinkles, dancing mockingly. Is this what getting under the skin means? 

Suddenly the power goes off. It is dark now. I can only see his vague silhouette glowing dimly in a light i conjure up in my mind. 

The intoxicating smell of burning coconut husk envelops us. The street is alive with the hum of vendors selling their wares to half naked kids. 

He gets up with a start, and totters into the room. I follow him in a haze, minutes later, as there is a sound of something crashing to the floor. 

I often lie awake till the wee hours of morning. I drink a lot of water, to clear my head after the demons have had their nightly fights. I wander through the house. It assumes a more familiar air in the night. But the rooms are smaller, the stairs narrower. I imagine hearing flakes of paint falling of the walls. Little by  little, the house seems to be falling apart. The metallic twang of the old fashioned door latch seeps through the peeling varnish and sticks to my fingers. Like stains of past, I catch myself thinking. 

In the morning, I watch him hobble around and pull out weeds from the flower patches. The marigolds are his favorite. Its perhaps the confounding swirl of petals that fascinate him. He even digs up the soil around the plants. And waters them from the rusty pail of water that I fill from the kitchen tap. 

It is absurd, watching him water withered flowers in the early summer sun. I feel the need to sit down under the mango tree. A swarm of translucent red ants realign themselves to bypass my intruding foot that breaks their line. He waves to me, pointing balefully at the bucket he has emptied. 

“Play me Kite”, he whispers. lying in his bed. It is a revolting afternoon, the air thick with unsaid things and the threat of rain. I reach for my phone and play the song. 

“Something, is about to give..” predicts omniscient Bono. 

I walk out of the room, and splash my face with lukewarm water from the tap. Bracing myself I walk back in. 

“I wonder what's gonna happen to you 

You wonder what has happened to me” 

I switch it off, “You need to get some sleep”. 

“It is a beautiful song” 

“Yes” 

“Do you wonder what’s going to happen to me?” 

“Get some sleep” 

“I often wonder what has happened to you” 

“What do you mean?” 

“Was I a good father?” 

“You are” 

A storm brews quietly in the western sky. Soon the windows are banging in the wind, dust whirls around in glee, lashing into the room through the open windows. Thunder and lightning follow. I go around the house stepping lightly over the layer of dust on the floor. What is it about leaving traces that I do not quite like? I go around picking up scattered things, and locking the doors and windows. When I walk back, I find myself stepping meticulously on the footprints I had left behind. 

We sit in the dark, waiting for the storm to pass. 

There is a deafening crack of thunder. I wearily walk out to the balcony. Lightning has struck the old stump of the leafless tree a few metres away. A persistent fire glows along its branches, kissing the dead growth, being petted by the provoking wind. In a minute, there is a blazing fire. Irony rains down, as if waiting for its cue to make a stage entry. 

There is something about watching things burn in the rain. 

Suddenly I'm a kid drenched in oppressive rain, watching a pyre near a tumid river. Across the flames, I see the hazy figure of a gaunt man in white. He flickers, dims, melts, floats, shimmers. I dont know if its the rising smoke that causes the illusion or if it's the tears in my eyes. Tears mixing with rain. I've begun not being able to tell them apart already. 

I hear him tottering up to me. He watches the glowing embers of the burning tree in wonder. The rain manages to put off most of it. Soon a fire brigade arrives, wailing into the storm. To watch water hosing down a burning tree in howling rain: the absurdity of it makes me sick. 

I bring in scalding hot tea. The storm has passed leaving behind an apologetic drizzle. The tea is a tasteless muddy liquid. He doesn't complain. Even slurps appreciation. I feel the overwhelming urge to hug him. The moment passes. I gulp down my cup like its an potion that will keep me alive. 

“Did I take you to your school?” Book of Laughter & forgetting sits open on his lap. The pencil in his hand hangs in painful anticipation, hovering a few centimeters above the damp page. 

“Yes, I used to sit behind you on the scooter, and we would ride down to the school.” Pause. 

“I used to hold on tight to your waist, hoping I don’t fall off.” 

“I would never let you fall off” he whispers. 

Something within me rises. A million pinpricks inside my head. A bristling along my spine. I wait till it passes. And then there is the same old dampness. 

“Take me there”. His voice quivers. 

I stare vacantly. My eyes refuse to focus. He touches my knee. 

“Please” 

The rickshaw creaks through the flooded streets. Crashing every now and then into puddles of ominous water. The bony man pulling the rickshaw flings curses to the threatening skies. I clutch the damp wooden contraption at my side that forms the frame for the wet hood of rough cloth over our heads. He sits by my side, oblivious to the potholes and splashes of rainwater. I breathe in, taking in his vague sour metal smell. Its as if he is a rusting iron man. I try placing the smell in my memories. 

Everything is an exercise in either remembering or forgetting for me. The things I cannot remember and the things I cannot forget get mixed up in my head. 

We are passing vaguely familiar streets. Now we get down in front of a huge iron gate. A board arches across it, spelling out the name of the school. The fading yellow school building looks like a cowering dog after the downpour. The vermilion flowers of the gulmohar tree are scattered like flames all over the dull brown earth. 

We stand side by side in the rain. One trying to recall what he can’t remember, the other trying to block out what she can’t forget. Together they hope to build a past they would both be happy with. 

Sometimes I wonder which one of us needs made up memories more. 

An old deserter or an abandoned waif. 

In his head, he must be imagining a dad holding his little girl’s hand and carrying her bag to the school gates. In my head, I see the lone little girl trudging listlessly. She looks back wistfully at all the other kids being kissed goodbye by their parents. 

I like his memory better. If I can make him believe it, I can make myself believe it too. 

As Alzheimer's wipes out each brain cell in his head, I am given a clean slate to work with. 

Each night I ransack my memories. Each morning I wake up to fight the hatred I feel for the man who chose to abandon me. Each evening I re-engineer the past, for him and for myself. And together we tumble into the soft luxuriant darkness of cotton candy memories. 

This elusive gift of forgetting will leave me stranded someday. 

But somebody must make amends for the past that has been pending. I do it, for the both of us. Goodbyes have never been easier. 


