From: Mustafa Abubaker <mustafaabubaker3@gmail.com>
Date: 29 September 2014 at 21:23
Subject: submission
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>
Bio: My name is Mustafa Abubaker. I have contributed to Rolling Stone, Complex, Mass Appeal, Creative Loafing, Wine & Bowties, The Aerogram, Pigeons & Planes, The Liner and more. This is my short story 

'If Cities Could Be Girlfriends'. 

She says she wants to drive far, drive far away, somewhere the wind won’t send shivers through her soul, somewhere the Sun won’t burn away all she has left in that pretty mind. I believe her, I wanna take her there. I wanna go with her. I wanna ghost ride the car, stand up through the sunroof, and shatter the glass windows. I wanna go to London and fuck her with the lights on. If cities could be girlfriends, London’s been on my mind all day. London’s so cold and wet in December but I keep her warm, I bring ember and pyre to her essence, her private stash. 

We’re here now and she wants to know why the color purple is her own little personal aphrodisiac. My baby wants to paint the walls purple so she’s always wet. My girl doesn’t care about approval and what you have to say about her outfit. My girl cares about how life makes her feel, how the Moon used to guide ships home, how we all need to be honest. She’s going to wear whatever she wants. I look at her, she lights a cigarette. I know it’s going to kill her one day but she doesn’t care. She wants to live in the moment, she wants to feel every sense, be stimulated. I think they call it being high on life. 

I don’t know why or how I’m here with her but I don’t complain. I adapt to things, I acclimate myself unlike my neighbor with the sweltering South. “It’s too fucking hot here,” he’d say and finish his drink, head back inside, waving me off.“Go back to the North then,” I’d wanna say, cursing him in my conscious, mind full of anything. But I wouldn’t say anything, I’d grimace a little and that’s how he sensed my discomfort. Body language is everything. It told me he thought I was awkward and now it’s telling me we have to get out of here. She wants to go to Karachi and see her cousins and I’ll go too. I’ll sneak in alcohol, find the Peshwari hash and roll skinny joints for us. If cities could be girlfriends, Karachi’s the one who never wanted to be with me. She rejected me, called me somebody else’s as she donned her veil and looked the other way, trying to send me a hint. 

We’re here now and she wants to know why my gaze makes her weak in the knees. My baby wants to make me feel the way I make her feel. My girl doesn’t care about her aunt’s recommendations or her cousins’ friend’s flirty touches. My girl cares about the way the Sun sets, whether infants see supernatural things or not, why the ocean tides never swept her in when she heard them calling her name. She’s going to feel whatever she wants. I look at her, she lights a cigarette, I know it’s going to kill her one day but she doesn’t care. She wants to live in the moment, she wants to feel every sense, be stimulated. I think they call it being high on life. 

I don’t know why or how I’m here with her but I don’t complain. I adapt to things, I acclimate myself unlike my neighbor with the sweltering South. “It’s too fucking quiet here,” he’d say and finish his drink, head back inside, waving me off.“Go back to the North then,” I’d wanna say, cursing him in my conscious, mind full of anything. But I wouldn’t say anything, I’d grimace a little and that’s how he sensed my discomfort. Body language is everything. It told me he thought I was awkward and now it’s telling me we have to get out of here. She wants to go to New York City and start over and I’ll go too. I’ll get a job; I’ll join the big chase and make a life for both of us. If cities could be girlfriends, New York City’s the one for me. So bound to millions of dreams but she waited for me, told me there’s no place I should rather be. 

We’re here now and she wants to know why I’m so distant. My baby wants to be with me more and more then less and less. My girl doesn’t care about the way the Hudson River glistens or how her mother calls her. My girl cares about the fashion party this weekend, why taxi cabs are so expensive and why anyone would live anywhere else. She’s going to leave me. I look at her, she lights a cigarette. I know it’s going to kill her one day but she doesn’t care. She wants to live in the moment, she wants to feel every sense, be stimulated. I think they call it being high on life. 

If cities could be girlfriends… if cities could be girlfriends… 

