From: Mathew George <georgebmathew81@yahoo.in>
Date: 25 November 2014 at 20:11
Subject: Submission
To: "outofprintmagazine@gmail.com" <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>
Bio: I am a Chartered Accountant, hailing from Cochin. I practice in Bangalore. I am a part of the Bangalore Writers Workshop Community. 


* “In the mood for a joke”* 

It was late afternoon and it was her last class for the day. The first hints of evening were setting in, the sun fading, as shadows fell across her desk. Maya looked out of the window of her second floor classroom and watched a group of boys playing football on the ground below. She was hardly paying attention to her math teacher who was scribbling on the blackboard with his chalk. She waited for bell signaling end of class to ring. 

One of the boys scored a goal and celebrated by spreading his arms out and running around, letting out whooping screams, as the others stood there laughing at the crazy celebration. Soon the bell rang. 

There was the sound of bags being packed, tiffin containers and pencil boxes being shoved in hurriedly into bags, as the boys raced each other to the door. 

“Come on lets go,” said Anjali 

Anjali was  her  friend, with whom she walked back home. They lived in the same locality. All the houses looked similar. A porch, a living room with a single window, a hall, 2 bedrooms, and a kitchen. Some yards had gardens, the more well off families had lawns and some lay bare. All of them were painted yellow. 

“Lets first go and pick up my brother from his class,” said Maya. 

Rohan was waiting for them in front of his classroom 

They walked back home. Rohan described a fight, which had taken place in his class. 

As they walked along Maya sensed a presence behind her. She turned around and saw Avinash Balakrishnanan. 

He wore thick black glasses and had curly hair. He was a short boy. What stood out though were his eyes. Dull, as if all life had drained out of them, almost moronic. Their eyes met and she quickly averted her gaze. 

“Doesn’t he stay in front of your house?” asked Anjali 

“Yes” 

“He is an idiot. He never answers the questions the teachers ask him and barely talks to anyone else. I also heard that he has failed twice and is two years older than us,” said Anjali 

Avinash had moved into the house in front of hers at the end of the summer holidays. It was a silent house. No laughter, not even the sound of T.V playing. Nobody ever visited the Balakrishnan's and the Balakrishnan's visited no one. 

One night she had heard her parents talk about them.Their eldest son had committed suicide and that was one of the reasons they had moved out here. 

“When are we making the birthday card for Mama” asked Rohan 

“Today evening when she is preparing dinner” said Maya 

They reached home.Hot snacks awaited them. Anita hugged both the children and enquired about their day at school. 

“We have a surprise for you tomorrow” blurted out Rohan 

“I don’t want to know,” said Anita with an affectionate smile. Maya slapped Rohan on his head. 

After having her bath Maya got busy preparing the birthday card for her mother. She used colored pencils and recreated a drawing of Papa bear, little boy bear and little girl bear singing “Happy birthday” to Momma bear, which she had seen at a gift shop. Momma bear is wearing an apron. Papa bear is wearing a tie and the boy bears is wearing shorts. The little girl bear is in a frock. 

She could hear her mother humming a song as she sat at the dining table and cut the vegetables. The humming stopped as the sound of her father’s scooter was heard in the front yard. She rushed to the door and saw Rohan being lifted up into the air by her father and kissed. Her father ruffled her hair and kissed Mama on her forehead. 

Before going to bed she looked out of the window in the hall, and saw Mr. Balakrishnan sitting on a chair in the dark, sipping from a glass in his hand. He was a tall man with jet-black hair combed impeccably into place.He sat still and straight. The front yard lay bare. 

Maya was woken up by her father early in the morning and she crept outside with him It was cold and the air smelt of fresh jasmine. Maya helped her father cut a mist covered rose and some croton leaves from their garden and watched as her father prepared a bouquet out of them. She looked across the porch and saw Mr.Balakrishnan seated on the chair, glass in hand. His eyes were closed. She felt her hands tremble. 

They sneaked back into the house, woke up Rohan and made him jump on Mother and wake her up. They sang “Happy birthday” for her. Their voices were raised and it rung across the house and out into the yard. 

She looked out of the window. Mr. Balakrishnan was not there. Avinash stood on the porch brushing his teeth, moronic gaze in place. 

That afternoon,at lunch hour Maya was at the school taps washing her hands when Avinash came beside her and drank from the tap. She turned back and moved away, when she heard him gently hum “Happy Birthday” . 

All through the afternoon hour in class she felt eyes on her. She did not turn around to look. She stared at the blackboard. She pressed her nails together. She wanted to be home. 

She felt an unfamiliar fear. 

Rohan was waiting for her a the end of classes. He had a bruise on his face.He had got into a fight he said. It did not pain he said. 

They walked home alone since Anjali had stayed behind for dance practice. Maya had tried dance classes and in a few days dropped out. 

Anita was waiting for them at the door. with a worried look. As soon as she saw Rohan's face, she turned pale. She took him to the bathroom and applied antiseptic on the bruise. She came out and slapped Maya. 

“Haven’t I told you”. “Haven’t I told you to watch out for him”. 

Maya’s face was impassive. 

“Oh dear “ “Oh dear” 

“I am sorry. Now baby go and please make some tea. Your father will be home soon” 

In the kitchen she parted the curtain and looked across. No one. Clothes hung on a line. A Sari, Grey pants, and a belt. The Sari fluttered in the breeze. She could hear her mother humming in the hall. It felt out of tune. Humming. Humming. Out of tune humming. It felt distant and sorrowful. The sound of the scooter was heard in the front yard. 

That night she lay on the bed and tried to sleep. She could hear Rohan's gentle breathing on the bed beside her. She counted backwards from 100. No sleep. She pulled the blanket upwards to cover her face. She turned left. Right. She looked out of the window. 

Finally She got up, went into the hall, opened the refrigerator, and took out the carrot pieces, which her mother had cut for the next day’s meal. She sat at the dining table and ate them. 

She sat there for an hour. She dozed off. A whimpering sound woke her up. It was coming from her parent’s bedroom. She moved towards the door, as the whimpering grew louder. She opened the door to find her mother sitting up on the bed looking at her father. Her father was whimpering and mumbling incoherently. Her Mother looked like the ice queen she had read about in a fairy tale. 

“Don’t pinch me. Please don’t pinch me …” mumbled her father. 

Her mother looked at her. Maya moved close to her father. His face was contorted, eyes open, and red. 

Maya wanted to shake her father hard and wake him up. But she stood still transfixed. 

“He will go back to sleep soon” said her mother. 

Soon the whimpering stopped,and she could sense her father’s body relax. She bent down and pressed her ear to his chest. It beat. 

She went back into the dining hall and sat at the table and laid her head on the table. Sleep embraced her. 

********************************* 

The bell rang. Maya woke up. She waited for her parent’s to wake up, and see who it was. 

The bell rang again. Twice. Maya walked up to the door and opened it. 

The Balakrishnan’s stood outside. Mr Balakrishnan held hands with his wife, who looked pale. She was a tall, thin woman who looked like she could break into tears at any moment. She wore the red sari Maya had seen hanging outside. Avinash stood in front of them holding a red, fluffy, cream filled cake with candles on it. 

“Where are your parents?” enquired Mr Balakrishnan 

“ I am right here” said Anita and stepped from behind the door. 

“It is Subash’s birthday today and we want to celebrate. Can we come in?”. 

“Sure. Who is Subash?” asked Anita. 

“He is Avinash’s brother” 

“Where is he?” asked Anita. 

“He is hidden somewhere. Where is your husband?” replied Mr Balakrishnan 

“Come in. You can meet him” 

Everybody went into the living room and seated themselves. Maya’s father sat on the sofa. 

Mr Balakrishnan stood up and his eyes darted from one corner of the room to the other. 

“Are you looking for something?” asked Anita. Mr Balakrishnan stared at her, then looked away, and started moving towards Maya’s parent’s bedroom. 

He bent his head down like a fox and screamed,“Come out Subash. Come out. We know you are hiding in here”. Then he walked into the room. 

Anita studied Mrs Balakrishnan intently .“What is your name?” enquired Anita. 

“I am Subash’s and Avinash’s Mother” said Mrs Balakrishnan. 

“I know that. What is your name? My name is Anita.” said Anita. 

Mrs Balakrishnan looked lost.” I forgot my name” She said. 

Mr Balakrishnan’s scream could be heard from inside the room.”Come out. You little bastard come out. I will eat the whole cake if you don’t come out.” 

“Do you know how to dance? You look like the kind of woman who dances, and sings.,” asked Anita. 

“Yes I do” said Mrs Balakrishnan. 

“Have you forgotten how to dance?” asked Anita and then laughed. 

Mrs Balakrishnan did not answer. 

“Can you teach Maya how to dance? She needs to be taught how to dance. I do not know how to sing nor dance. That is why I had trouble with both my deliveries. Dancing helps to widen a girl’s hip, which makes her ready to bear children.  A girl should know how to dance and sing” said Anita. 

Mr Balakrishnan screamed louder 

“ Do you know how to dance Avinash?” asked Anita. 

“I know how to sing”. Saying this the curly haired boy stood up and started singing “Happy Birthday”. He had an angelic voice. Everybody joined in, as Mr Balkrishnan continued scampering from one room to another screaming. 

Mr Balakrishnan came back into the room and sat on the chair. 

“Did you find him?” asked Anita. 

Mr Balakrishna stood and removed his belt and held it to his nose. 

“He hung himself with this belt didn’t he. Can you smell him?” asked Anita. 

“You asked earlier where Subash was. Now you are asking me whether he hung himself? Are you crazy?” asked Mr Balakrishnan. 

“I was joking. You don’t’ seem to be in the mood for a joke” replied Anita 

Mr Balakrishnan turned to Maya’s father. “Are you the man of the house or is she”. 

“He is the man of the house and I am the queen., ” said Anita. 

Everybody had stopped singing but Avinash continued singing that old familiar song,. 

“Let us get out of here. These people are Mad” said Mr Balakrishnan. 

Then the Balakirhnan held hands and floated out of the window. 

Anita stood up, yawned and went back into their room. Maya’s father stood up and followed. 

Maya cleaned a piece of cake, which had fallen on the floor as the Balakrishnan’s floated away. 

****************** 

Maya woke up on her Bed. She could hear her Mother singing in the kitchen. 

She walked into the dining room to find her father dressed up for work and seated at the table reading a paper. 

“Did you have a good night’s sleep?” asked her father. 

“I had a nightmare” replied Maya. 

“I had one too. But nightmares pass. Everything passes. I woke up very happy.” replied Maya’s father and went back to the paper. 

Anita walked up to Maya and ruffled her hair.” I am sorry I got angry at you yesterday evening dear.” said Anita. 

“It is all right Mother” replied Maya. 

Rohan came and sat at he table. 

“Come on sit Maya. Let us have breakfast. Look at what I have placed on the table,Maya. Isn’t today such a bright and happy day? I feel blessed. I want all of you to have breakfast. Then I shall go to the temple and pray that nobody casts an evil eye on us. Oh today is such a happy day.” said Anita. 

Anita had put the bouquet in a glass of water on the table and placed the card of the bear family next to it. 

Then Papa, Mama, little girl and little boy sat around the table and dipped their spoons into the porridge. Something red glimmered on the floor in the sunlight streaming in through the window. Something, which looked like a piece of carrot or a piece of cake. 

……………………………………………… 