From: indu p <indu.parvathi@yahoo.co.in>
Date: 30 September 2014 at 22:24
Subject: Submission
To: "outofprintmagazine@gmail.com" <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>
Bio: I am a writer at heart as  my immediate environment resonates  as brief narratives in my mind. I had met you during the short story writing workshop during Times Literary Fest, 2013 and my story was published in your blog. Please find my story pasted below. Thanks& Regards, Indu Parvathi 

**ANAMNESIS* * 
Indu Parvathi* 

Dusk had died and a shadowy gloom was creeping up the tiled roof of the cottage as Blossom drove into the porch.  Inside the cold house, the mute, mildewed air hung heavy and still. It was an unbearable silence - an overpowering wet blanket kind of silence which suffocated her in its squishy folds.  Just a disused building- that’s what it had become without its mistress.   The house and her mother- both were indistinguishable in their warmth; in their ability to welcome her into the soft, warm cocoon of comfort and love each time she returned. It had been almost a year since she stepped into the house, though she lived just a 20 minutes drive away.  It was a fragrant summer evening when her mother spoke to her last. She was standing on the veranda reminding her to send the children on a visit in her endearing, tremulous voice. Next to her, the jasmine flowers were opening their petals like crystal stars in the green foliage.  Before she could complete what she was saying, she swayed a little, wobbled and sank down to the terracotta step leading to the car porch.  Then the life in her pleading eyes died - just like that, like a light being switched off.  And then the house died too. Her father had gone five years before that in an accident. Blossom shrugged away the memories and stepped in to the drawing room. The task ahead was daunting. She was going to clear out the house in the next seven days for the new owner. Everything had to go- the furniture, cupboard after cupboard stacked with clothing and linen, her mother’s china collection - everything. She would sell off most of the stuff. Some could go to relatives and friends who had been close to her mother. She did not want the house. It was too painful to retain something which constantly reminded her of her loss; moreover the money could come in handy. Her son was going abroad to study in an expensive university. Days scuttled past. Shekhar and her sons darted in and out whenever they could. But mostly Blossom was left alone to travel back and forth in a chaotic procession of memories from all stages of her life. It was the sixth day, and there were still more things to clear. Her past had shrunk to a messy, dusty pile of knick knacks and packets on the floor. There were some things she had rescued from the jumble that poured out from the cupboards. She needed to sort them out: mostly memories rather than possessions- like the sky blue gown she had worn on her high school graduation night, a few diaries she had saved because they were special and odd bits and ends   from her mother’s collectibles and some photo albums. She opened the windows wide open to let in the summer sun. Pink rimmed frangipani flowers gazed at her desolately, reaching out to her with the fragrance of lazy childhood afternoons spent in the garden. But, there was no more time for goodbyes. From a picture frame on top of the pile her father smiled benignly, his mirthful eyes glistening behind his round rimmed glasses. Her elder son sat in his lap, flashing a toothy grin and reaching out with pudgy, chocolate smeared hands. A couple of hours later most of the things stood neatly sorted out to separate stacks in cartons and suitcases. A few more books to go now, Blossom sighed. She   pulled out a leather bound diary and leafed through the faded, painfully curvy pencil script and accompanying sketches. When she put it back she tugged at the frayed edges of a photograph which peeped out temptingly from a coffee table book urging her to revisit some forgotten moments from the past. It was an old family photo- a young couple smiling smugly with a plump, frizzy haired   baby in a lemon yellow frock in a glitzy studio setting. They were sitting on a burgundy sofa flanked by garish   bouquets of bright, cheap plastic flowers on either side. She looked at the faces peering at her from a split second so many years ago. Something vaguely disturbing stirred in her mind. They were not friends, nor were they relatives. Who then were they? In his immaculate suit, pin striped tie and his erect posture the man looked every inch of a gentleman. He exuded a youthful, earnest kind of confidence from the depth of his brown eyes. There was a familiarity in his expression. She stared at the photo for a long moment, not being able to decipher the vague, nagging feeling that the innocuous photo was the door to a poignant story. What was it? She wandered vaguely through the empty rooms in search of her water bottle. The purple bottle beckoned to her from a cardboard box dumped on the floor where their old mahogany bookshelf used to be. The worn out marble floor had perforated, muddy dents where the shelf had sat for 40 years.  She had even found a pink butterfly clip, one she had used during her high school days wedged in a corner when the shelf was removed. She remembered her convent school and all the fun she had -those carefree years; roaming the colony streets on her bicycle, the colony chapel and pleasant Sunday mornings, friends and laughter, and of course her mom and dad. They were surely the best years of her life. That’s when she remembered him with a jolt- the man in the photograph. Yes, it was during the fag end of her high school days that she had met him. The incongruity of the series of meetings which followed had made this first memory very vivid. A cold evening in December, he had intercepted her life outside the ice cream parlour in the park.  He appeared to be about her father’s age, may be in his early forties. She remembered him striding purposefully towards her, dressed immaculately in a   charcoal grey suit, looking quite out of place in the bright, sweatshirt clad crowd in the park.  He stood at arm’s length, enveloping her in his intimidating allure .She was startled when her name slid down from his mouth like soft silk. But then he wouldn’t say anything more and after a long moment of suffocating silence she had broken free and run back to her friends. It was almost a fortnight later that she saw him again. She was gliding past the colony chapel on her sports bike   when he suddenly materialized right in the middle of the road. Though she managed to swerve past him, she met him again and again later- near the pool, in the library, in the cafeteria, near the stadium, in the sports complex… Every time he looked at her imploringly, with his huge soulful eyes as though he wanted to tell her something. Then one day when she had almost forgotten him, he reappeared, this time he appeared right in front of amidst the shelves in the bookstall. It was a dead-end and he fixed her there with his glinting, brown eyes. His deep voice resonated around her like musical chords soothing her into a trance. 

When he turned around, he had a thoroughly confused 15 year old in tow, trailing behind him mutely to the Bistro next door. She cringed when she looked across the table at his handsome face and wondered what kind of a pervert would intimidate a young girl and drag her along.  15 minutes later he still hadn’t told her anything that made much sense to her, except questioning her casually about her studies and future options. After regaining enough senses to break free and walk away, she stood up slowly, swallowed all the unasked questions and mumbled a goodbye. That’s when he pushed a thin paper packet towards her. Something surprising happened at that moment, which changed her attitude towards him completely.  His eyes started welling with tears and a teardrop slid down his chiselled face and his determined chin to crash on the glass tabletop. Then he got up abruptly and just walked away. Bewildered and overcome with curiosity she had taken the packet home. She unwrapped the parcel in the privacy of her bedroom but had found nothing but the photograph of a young couple and a baby, presumably a family photograph of the man, clicked years ago. The young family and the child did not ring any bells. She had not said a word about the stranger at home as it would have only invited restrictions from her mother. “Weirdo, tell him that you will call the police the next time you meet him,” her friend Namita had told her. The deluge of the boisterous vacation that followed and the excitement of college admissions drowned the photograph and the stranger completely. In all the years that followed she had never met him again. She sat down with the water bottle and scrutinized the photograph which had captured a moment so many years ago. In the yellowing photograph the family sat poised, perfectly encapsulated in a bubble of happiness, leaving in her a strange kind of uneasiness. The baby with its brown glittering eyes and curly hair reminded her of a cute doll which she had in her childhood. The young woman sitting with him was resplendent in a pink frilly dress. Her hair framed her radiant face like a halo in a small fluffy bob. Her eyes, her perfectly oval face and the way she tilted her chin proudly-everything was dearly familiar to her. How do I know her, and why didn’t I notice her when he gave me the photo, wondered Blossom. She sighed and stood up placing the photo back in the book, trying to shrug away the memory.  But the beautiful face haunted her through the rest of the evening as she feverishly worked through the heap. By eight in the evening everything was packed and stacked away neatly in labelled cartons and boxes. Dressed in an old satin frock, Blossom stood in front of the antique wall mounted mirror in her bedroom. In the patches of mirror where the mercury coating hadn’t chipped off yet, she could see bits and pieces of her face and abyss of loss in her brown eyes. Every link with her past would be severed the next day when she would pass the gates for the last time. But in a split second, without any warning, the scarred reflection in the old mirror shattered the person named Blossom as she had known herself all those 35 years into fluffy cotton wool drifting in the air.  It was the woman in the photograph who stared back at her mournfully from the mirror. The same features set in a perfectly oval face and the same tilt of head. It was not her, It was the other woman; the only difference was her hair which streamed past her shoulders in a curly, tumbling mass. After a few moments of frenzied action, the long tresses lay down in a silky mass on the floor and the picture in the mirror was complete. Blossom curved her quivering lips into that haunting, blissful smile in the photograph. The snap trembled in her hand and ever so slightly her chin tilted up to match that proud bearing in the image which had destroyed her picture perfect past. In a while they were one. The unfamiliar woman in the photo and her. Or was she a stranger at all? “Who am I?” Cackled Blossom. The empty house echoed with her hysterical laughter. Suddenly a memory floated up from deep within her soul- of the sea and a small cottage and the ringing laughter of the young lady in the photograph. Blossom was just a toddler ambling towards her. “Mom,” she sang out sweetly in her baby voice. Light dimmed around her and the house and her past died completely in her heart. *Anamnesis- recollection, especially of a supposed previous existence 