From: Arijeet Mandal <mandalarijeet@yahoo.in>
Date: 25 May 2015 at 19:42
Subject: Re: SUBMISSION
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>
Bio: Arijeet Mandal, (L.W), Age- 26 Arijeet has recently finished his MPhil degree from CSSS, Calcutta. Along with academic writing he wants to keep on writing short fiction and drawing comic strips. From his small town of Jalpaiguri he has traveled far from home, and observed ways and manners of lives of people, and these experiences has made him a writer of fantasy, horror and the magical. 


*All that Death* 

That afternoon I made love to a woman who was also a sparrow. When I planted my naive kisses and rather lonely embrace, I was afraid that I was going to crush her. Her hands and wings fluttered and wrapped me up, the wings smelled of sunsets and scraped lemons, and I felt all the unloving years of my time, in this life, brushed off from my back, like sudden whitespots off from a black jacket. I tried to sleep with my head nudged between her breasts- the heartbeat was a harmony of pitter-patter rainyroofs and tabletop fingerbeats made by villains of ancient films. Sleep came back like a lost bestfriend after a broken love affair. I did not realise that she was a sparrow at first glance, nor do I believe that I could have at that time. I was still in the habit of drinking milk, as it was, from a bowl that I set up every morning. The women who are also birds have mastered the art of hiding themselves from feline beasts living in the hearts of men; they learned that facing centuries of witch-hunt. She told me that. Actually, she went as far as telling me that most witch-hunts in Asia and Europe were a secret search for women who were also birds. I don’t want to make a froth of a story by telling you about the whole frigging office and other characters, I am running out of time. Details kill me, so I shall be curt. The woman who was a bird didn’t actually come through my window, as it might seem. You see, I used to work as an assistant editor for the local newspaper. That is where I saw her for the first time, in my office. It was habitual, another new year, yet another new intern trying to learn the art of writing acceptable fiction for daily consumptions. She was tall, scrawny, wheatish, bespectacled and somewhat girlish in her manners; between the kohl and her whites of her eyes, she had faded little red veins moving up her eyes like twigs of red-amaranthus. I guessed she was a night creature. I talked to her sometimes, about the quality of coffee, the weather, sweet things of the 90’s or ghastly and hopeful times ahead. You know, the regular safe talk people get involved in while meeting someone in the smoking room, canteen or other little places of necessity. I imagined my life with her as much as I did with all the other women there, nothing special about that. It so happened one day that we were in a group of twelve or fifteen, sitting at the canteen and making small talk before returning to our battlestations. For one conversation regarding childhood bruises, I carefully laid out my spiced history of fighting school-bullies when I was nine years old, I was narrating this to a colleague who had issues with his boss, and it was a sort of an attempt to address his anger. Of course, I lacked the charisma of a better liar. Somehow, she was listening from the other end of the table. I was not aware of that, which is why I was taken aback by her question. “You drink milk, I presume?” I believe I was too startled to think about the innuendos. I stammered off a vegetable “umm yes...what do...” She cut me short “Milk makes you feel lonelier than you are and worry much about territory. It is the fuel for cats and dogs and everyone mean.” It did sound stupider and stranger than it sounds now. I don’t think she noticed the giggles and surprises on other people’s faces. I don’t think she was intentionally absurd either, but I had nothing to reply. I smiled like a gopher, that is, if gophers could smile. And that was that. I could not, rather, did not get a chance to talk to her for a while. We went out in groups though. One time, during my birthday, I invited a small group over to my apartment. It was a small cosy little thing, at least to me. Two bedrooms and a kitchen, there was only one toilet with attached bath. I used to invite some of my colleagues for a drink or a chat, whenever they were upto it. This time she visited my place. Unlike others, who were busy getting drunk or talking about their *almost* lives, she seemed pensive and observant. Her steps across the rooms were like a detective who had the grace of a dancer or a huntress. I could see her eyes following almost everyone and every corner and all the little nothings I had filled up my rooms with. It made me a bit uncomfortable; I think it made me a bit afraid too, albeit in a good way. Something else was happening on the other front though. Trina was the departmental art-supervisor. The woman had climbed the stairs of the corporate honour-level with the agility of a panther. It was only a matter of two years that she became the head of her department from an intern. It was not something she did while crawling out of a hat! She was an ardent worker, hard-working and industrious. Of course, she had the wit and charm of a submerged flagpole, but I don’t pin her on that. If you knew her well, you might just as well pity her, but you can’t, for she was also a tyrant. I think I missed the first part of what she said, but she turned and addressed me directly “Have you read all these books?” She did not actually point towards the three bookracks, all four-shelved and kept in a graphic rather than thematic order. “Not really” I flashed a smile with that. “Why do you buy all these books then? It’s such a waste of money...it’s your money, I understand. I just think it is pointless if you don’t finish them” the slur and honesty was perhaps for the vodka. “I buy them, to not have to buy them when I actually feel like reading them.” “That’s bullshit!” “No. It’s just an obsession with future.” I tried to keep a pasty smile while my head heated up along with the alcohol in my veins. “I would rather spend on good times itself... ” She flicked her hair while saying it “Perhaps spend on better shirts and furniture”, it was an obvious jab. Not even the lamest duck in the parliament of nations could overlook her suave, malicious effort of proving her hierarchy. She could just pack her pride in a bottle of Diet Coke and it would still weigh more than a blue whale. “I think I may have spoiled myself that way...” she laughed having said it, in a manner that would make you fetch the shovel. Possibly some manure to sprinkle over the corpse too. “I just got into a habit really. I think, now I cannot wear any tees other than Puma...” she was about to say something more. Right then, the disaster took place. “Ah! Well...And I have stopped explaining shit to fucking dimwits...” I said it. I, bloody, said it! Right when something sinister hits you, it happens as if you are scrapped in twain, and one part of you is there at the scene, the other drifts off among uncharted time-spaces. This ethereal part tries to look back, tries to adjust its vision, as if looking back would erase the issue. Or mellow down the palpitating foreboding fear in the heart. Then silently and surely, the truth dawns on you, like the falling anvil labelled Acme, like the trapped mouse in Kafka, or a burly Greek in his tragedy—time catches up with reality. And nothing can make it right again. It was evident on everyone’s face that it was unaccounted for. Not even a distant dying saxophone could have bargained mercy from the silence in the room. The semi-boss left my place, accompanied by a few favourites. I guess her anger was real, it showed through her drunken glassy eyes. I felt sorry for her, and this was stupid. I should have been sorry for myself. I guess I was secretly too proud for that, or more sinisterly, I had arrived at the conclusion that they had nothing more to give me; neither experiences, nor money, sex, conversations or anything new of any kind. End of *quid pro quo* as I knew it. Other people dwindled off little by little after that. Some of them suggested, in a weak manner, that apology will work miracles, for she is *also* soft. I turned up at the job next day. It was weird a bit. Nobody mentioned anything. Nobody, not even the supervisor was hard or hateful to me. I did my work at the first half, and then headed off for the cafeteria. I sat with the regular bunch of people. None of them seemed different, except occasional glances of pity. *Pity drives pity out*, as the dead author said *.* Towards the end of my shift for the day, I walked into the supervisor’s office. I handed over my letter of resignation. The white sheet had been spray-painted its words from the printer at my desk; the paper showed soft watermarks if you held it against the light, “*AdLib*” it read in italics. Fuck giving out one month prior notices! I did not stay for a conversation; I expressed my thanks and walked out in the late hours of Calcutta afternoon. I quit my job for I was as important as other sixteen heads popping up from the cubicles; it was not a protest asking for a room of my own. No. I just didn’t want anything at that moment. Anything at all. I upped the volume of my mp3 player a good many bars on my way back home. “*Mr. Sandman bring me a dream...make it the cutest that I’ve ever seen...”* 

2 I took up writing. And I brought out the sketchbooks from the back of the cupboard, through the cobwebs and sands; it could well have been the library at Alexandria, or Nalanda if it had sand. I took up writing to kill time and self-pity. Writing is good for people who want to forget as well as people who forget all too much. It is like Hunger in that sense, pleasure for who has plenty and a treacherous ‘*Always’* for the poor. I spent my days skipping between eating, masturbating and looking at the blinking cursor. Writing too, sometimes, when it came as a trickle of stale beer found on yesternight bottles left a foot from the bed. Pit-pit-patter-tappity-tap went the keyboard. I painted circular lines on blank canvasses. They were like crop-circles made by ancient mythical creatures from the star system of *Zeta Reticulli*. I achieved a big and delicious nothing. Yet, it was my own, personal *Nothing*. I felt pregnant. It was then that she visited me. There was a call from her. I thought it was a similar *sad to see you go* or *could have worked out* text message or calls that I was receiving from the office. I was grateful that it was not. The phone rang around noon. I was still in bed. I looked at the blinking screen and found her name on it. *Hello*.... “Did I wake you up?” Either that or I had a larynx transplant. I chuckled to convince away my annoyance. “No...Not really. I was about to get up.” “I want to come to your place.” I felt strangely good and uneasy at the same time. There you see, someone has sense, someone wants my company. Someone misses me enough to stand my sight. Then again....other people! “Well...I am trying to write and stuff. You know...I wanted to be a writer...thought this was the best time I could cope up with my routine.” On the other side of the phone it cracked a bit, made a hollow noise, then the line steadied itself. “I see you have given up that horrid habit of drinking milk every morning before running off to office.” I sat up straight. *This was not in the script!* “Who is telling you all this? Is it Nitin?” As much I was surprised, I was annoyed too. “I want to visit you. This afternoon, right after my shift is over.” “Why?” my face grimaced after saying that. *I was not...I did not want to look rude*. “Nothing...just felt like seeing you.” *Well.* “Sure. What time?’ “5’o clock. Sharp. I will be at your place.” And she was. 3 I had a story. It was like dough of blue cloud kept over some itchy glass. You know what itchy glasses are? No? It is like a glass plate or bowl or whatever made of glass with imperfect bubbles and grooves and ridges on it. You feel like holding the puffy cloud and scratching the glass, it is a burning desire. But you can’t touch it. That is how I saw my good times. That is how I saw Love. That is also how I saw Death. It is always like that. All things that are beautiful are like clouds kept on itchy-glass bowls. You feel like touching it. Not just touching it, but touching it aloud with passion in your eyes, as if you were waiting to hear what it sounded like. Or feel its touch and vibrato under your very skin. You can’t, but you can’t. And that is the *Secret*. That is how beautiful she was. 4 Generally I ask people to turn up in the morning, that is, if they have to meet up with me for some reason. Not today though, I was alone at my place all morning. I had finished my breakfast-alias-lunch with some burnt chicken and yellow rice. I always preferred eating less to get me riled up about working. I remember a friend who told me once that there is a stark difference in thoughts that come to us before and after a meal. He had asked me to think about something in an empty stomach, and once after having eaten. I never strictly followed the idea, but I do experiment with it now and then. This, the meagre meal used to give me a sense of purpose, an agony of hunger and desperation—I felt busier than I actually was, and more serious. I woke up with the phone call and had my meal. Then I sat down to think about my career options. I felt like discussing it with someone from my office, someone who would not act like a worm. I was getting this sudden streaming urge to talk to her about this issue, this and a thousand other things I had thought on streets and in places known and strange. I cannot explain why, but I felt I had to tell her everything when she arrives. There was one more thing, for some reason, I just remembered that it has been over a year I had slept with someone. Last time I had sex was with Rita, I was dating her and the moment then was ruined by immediacy of unhandled desires and dizzy alcohol visions. You see, it was that kind of thing where one tries to convince oneself that he or she is truly happy, and that the world is but made of greeting-card epiphanies. Still, she was nice; she had the wits of a lawyer, took street animals to vets and often kept them as pets, preferred having conversations than going to movies, and liked most of me. I think she pitied me too, for some reason, but she was nice. Moreover, with the deplorable number of women I actually had sex with, I was truly glad I met someone who had a mole on her nipple. It was harrowingly poetic. We both cried our hearts out when we said our goodbyes. It suddenly made me so weak inside, accepting that a mere prospect of a visitor tingled my sex and fantasy. I was scrying for memories which reminded me that I had wronged Rita, in several ways, and the fact that I was secretly glad when she left me for a job in another city. From then on, I started to think about the millions of ways I had been brutal with other people. I remembered the day my mother visited me, mostly to cook my food during my long-standing jaundice. I sent her off immediately after getting better. I should have got her that saari, and that fake-chinese table set. All this years, I was just arrogant, self-absorbed little bastard; something like the idiotic protagonist from the pages of *Great Expectations*. Absolutely nothing to give back to the world, other than a spiced salad of vanity and insecurity. I could cry myself to death to gain entry into the fields of Nada. I heard the doorbell, I looked at the watch, and it was still four minutes to five. I opened my door and let her in. She was wearing a blue dress; it hugged her shoulder as if to let her shrug better, the rest flowed around her falling till her knees, loosely bound by a belt around her waist. It was as if a wind broke in, glazing like copper sulphate and smelling like candid herbs plucked from mountain tops. I looked to make sure she was the same woman. She came and sat on my bed, not that I had chairs of any kind but two beanbags. “Are you doing better?” I couldn’t help but smile, “yeahh...well. I have had worse.” “Oh stop complaining! How many years have you waited to lose those things, eh? Those jobs, and reasons, and more reasons to do what you did not want to do?” She said. “You are finally being yourself, I can see that.” She looked, more like made a gesture towards the unkempt house. The cups, books, pillows and beers, even the leftover pieces of fruits were all out there, out of their places. They stuck out like war trophies. “Yes, but I am still worried about a thing or two.” I said. “Writer’s block?” “No no...I am writing and sketching and doing other things. Somehow they just don’t add up, I mean they don’t look that promising.” “What can I drink?” “Well, as you can see, I have some vodka...” I said, sounding unnecessarily sheepish. “Or you can have tea; it is a good one.” “Sure.” I was not sure what she was sure about, but I took a guess. I thought she would like some tea. I went into the kitchen and set some water to boil. I was suddenly overtaken by a great sense of embarrassment at the mess of things around the house. ‘I should have let the maid do her stuff, instead of sending her away.’ I dashed towards the sink and started washing some of the cups. I knocked a few other pans and plates off from the pile. “Are you in a hurry?” I was startled a bit. I did not hear her creep up from behind me. “Scared you didn’t I?” And she smiled. Of course I was a bit confused. I barely had conversations with her, and here she is, acting like an age old friend. Fuck! She was acting like we are a *thing*. And I was falling more into the trap. I was getting out of my mask of the good-one. “It is never that easy dear. The hardest part before the job is to break the ice.” She said. I could not understand what it meant, but I did get a sudden chilled sense of my mind being read by her. We went back to where we were, and she took the exact spot she had chosen earlier. I gave her the cup and took one for me. I sat at the other end of the bed facing her. Right at that moment, she smiled, and said something. I don’t know what she said, but it sounded like something arcane, something drastic yet powerful. It was riddled with phonemes long forgotten and consonants deep as starholes, and I could see the words travelling from her lips towards me through the air, with an unknown script, yet carrying the reflection of the first life and the surprise of the first death, it floated through the air and light and glittered like the gaseous embers of colliding galaxies. And I was overtaken by joy and pain, anger and love, despairs of million kinds and hopes of unknown reasons, all at the same time. I fell; I almost dashed towards her and held her in the tightest embrace that I had ever committed to anything or anyone. I felt as if I was going to get washed away by the flood inside me, I was clutching her for the thousand strange and known senses coursing through my veins, but mostly, I was afraid that I would lose existence if I let her go. And I talked. I talked of the day I was born and the doctor smirked at my scrawny eyes. I suddenly remembered horrid and blissful things I had heard from inside my mother’s womb. I told her about the day my cousin peeped inside the pram and saw me, she was overtaken by a sudden urge for a new toy, and that very year she would elope with a man who beat her up on later days, pushing her towards slow and untraceable poisoning of her husband. *She took off my shirt*. I told her about the time I pissed on my pants in school, and the kindergarten teacher left me pantless in the bench for a period, and a friend measured my penis with his. *She unfastened my belts and I took her dress off, she was wearing different coloured lingerie.* I stammered and told her about the day my cousin brother and I ran off from home and watched the ducks in a pond, all day long, while eating unedibly raw guavas. The youngest of the ducks had a fiery red beak, and we named it after a God, and laughed at the blasphemy. *Her breasts were small, pointy, and soft like moonlit seashores. I regretted not having wider tongue or sharper teeth. She tasted like melancholic soulberries. I could eat her raw*! Then in broken fits of sobbing and laughter, often at the same time, I told her about the day my father walked out of our lives for another woman. I was in school, took me four months and a holiday to understand that he is not coming back, which meant he was not coming for the parent-teacher meeting before summer vacation either. And she too, whispered into my ears, secrets and mysteries unknown to man and beast. *She rode me. It was not an insertion, but a fusion of things.* *She fucked as if she once taught the Nymphs how to do their job.* My vision blurred, with tears and with all that love. I was afraid that I was beginning to see the truth of things. In the stead of her hands, I could see wings, her strong and shaped legs had turned to rougher claws. I could feel her beak pecking my throat and often biting my flesh. She was sitting on me pillion, with feathers of soft hues, her eyes had lost their whites and had turned dark and darker still, like pools looking into the Earth’s core. *We were still on*. Little by little, I sensed my fingers falling asleep. I felt like passing through clouds. I felt a strange, cold sensation running through my entire existence, and my heart started beating faster. Then I could feel all my limbs fall silent. I felt I was crossing the threshold of the planet, and was being drawn by an incredible speed from somewhere outside. *Heart grew faster still.* A few moments later I felt my torso losing its sense, I could almost feel my liver stopping its writhing inside, and the other organs just...sort of...faded away. The heartbeat by now seemed like a thousand drums beat in unison. I felt the pull of a thousand strong rocket engines, whooshing me past galaxies and nebulas. My thought, my last thought before becoming blind forever, before those two drops of tears rolled away from my eyes, and I let go all things including the faeces I held in—I could hear the sound of her soft lips touching mine. I could hear the last faint sounds of my heart. And then, the heart missed the beat. 

--END-- 

Author---- *L.W* 