From: rahad abir <rahadabir@gmail.com>
Date: 23 May 2015 at 16:18
Subject: submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com
Bio: Born and bred in Dhaka, Bangladesh, Rahad Abir <http://www.rahadabir.com/> is a fiction writer. His short stories have appeared in The Penmen Review <http://penmenreview.com/the-smell/>, Aerodrome <http://aerodrome.co.za/fiction-the-god-boy/> and Toad Suck Review. His wining short story ‘‘I am in London’’ is appearing in an anthology from England. He has worked as journalist, university teacher and interpreter. Currently he is working on his first novel. 

*Excerpt from Fragrance of Loss* 

*The Interrogation* 

About ten o’clock Shelley was taken for interrogation. It was the same office, the same officer as yesterday. 

The officer was writing something in a register. He took no notice of Shelley. Shelley stood at the same spot, behind the same chair. The spot on his left looked empty. Yesterday, Sufia filled that spot. *Yesterday* had been a long time, Shelley started to feel. *Yesterday* had been far away like *once upon a time*. 

The officer took his time. He double-checked the writing he’d just written before closing the register-book. He lifted his head. His eyes under his bushy eyebrows looked up at Shelley and his body leaned back in his chair. With his police index finger, the officer made a gesture for Shelley to sit down. Shelley did accordingly. The officer gave an intent look on his face. A long police look. Interrogation at first sight? Shelley felt uncomfortable. He was unable to keep looking back into the interrogating-eyes. He chose to move his eyes to and fro. He spotted that the officer’s undershirt was visible underneath his uniform. And visible was his unclothed peeping hairy chest underneath his white undershirt. This let him picture the officer’s flabby hairy belly. 

‘‘You are Hindu?’’ Finally the officer asked. The words buzzed under his president-alike mustache. President Ayub Khan had grey-and-black chevron mustache. But the officer had all black. 

It stung Shelley. What was wrong with that? He shouldn’t ask. He should know the interrogation inquiry implied something. It implied that being Hindu in Pakistan was an offence. A punishable offence. Perhaps. Did the interrogating-eyes mean that? 

‘‘I am asking a question,’’ the police voice hovered in the air. That was hard to ignore. 

Shelley nodded. But the officer’s accent still hovered in the air. It sounded northern. 

‘‘Can’t you talk?’’ the officer asked. 

And Shelley detected his slight West Bengal accent immediately. It gave him a bit of a joy. The officer must have migrated here after the partition. 

‘‘Yes, I was born into a Hindu family.’’ Shelley broke his silence. 

Once again a long police look. He smoothed down his presidential-alike mustache. Two times with two fingers. ‘‘Where do your parents live?’’ 

Shelley sensed the officer was trying to trick him into saying something. ‘‘Gopala,’’ he said. 

‘‘All your family?’’ 

The officer sounded he’d learnt everything about him. This was just an interrogation trick. Shelley got that. He should give him what he wanted to hear. 

‘‘My father lives in Gopala. My mother and two sisters are in India.’’ 

‘‘What the hell you’re doing here then?’’ With a big bang on the table his voice jumped high. ‘‘Why didn’t you get your ass over there?’’ 

Shelley knew all this. The question he was going to be asked. The same question he’d answered many times to many people. It demanded an explanation. ‘‘They moved there only after the riot broke out in ’64. My mother did it because of my sisters’ safety.’’ 

Thinking back, a phrase struck his head: Grab the Hindus by one and two, Have ’em in the fore-and-after noon too. Muslim rioters had used the phrase a lot then. For many days and nights he’d had many disturbing dreams about this horrific phrase. Like a chicken they would skin him off? Or like cows? As he’d seen them doing during their animal sacrifice festival? 

Many blood-freezing killing stories arrived in Gopala at that time. Muslim rioters in Khulna stopped trains. They checked every passenger’s manhood and killed instantly who were uncircumcised. Word also spread that in some places Muslims forced circumcised many Hindus. 

‘‘I understand,’’ the officer said. ‘‘Likewise in India. The same story. But why didn’t *you* move?’’ 

Again a long police look. 

‘‘I could be a Hindu, but I was born here…in Pakistan.’’ 

‘‘But you are Hindu. A Hindu can’t love Pakistan. I know you Hindus well. You guys work here and smuggle all your wealth to India. You finish your studies here and then leave one day for India. However, my point is, how dare you did *hanky-panky* with a Muslim girl?’’ 

It offended Shelley terribly. The officer’s stress in the phrase *hanky-panky* was obvious. Did he happen to hear Neil Diamond? The popular *Hanky Panky* song? Shelley took a minute to answer. ‘‘We are legally married. I converted to Islam.’’ His firm voice said. 

‘‘Heh,’’ a sudden flood of air came out of his mouth. The officer half-rose from his chair with a snarl and brought his angry police face close to Shelley, ‘‘don’t you talk law with me. I keep law in my pocket.’’ At a 45-degree-angle his police eyeballs’ aimed at Shelley’s eyeballs. ‘‘You converted to Islam, huh? Have you circumcised yet? Still you are Hindu. A Malaun.’’ 

Malaun? Accursed? In the Land of the Pure Hindus were accursed? Why? What was wrong with them? Were they bastard kids of god? Shelley shouldn’t ask. 

The officer leaned back in his chair. Again a long police look. A long pause. He rose from his chair and side-stepped. He stood by the empty chair on Shelley’s left. Shelley felt really tiny next to a large police body. Before long the officer lifted his left leg and had his foot on the edge of the chair. His fat belly bent. His fingers went for his boot, for the loosened shoe laces. 

Shelley saw the lifted police shoe was shining as if it had been polished a second ago. The officer had hairy forearms too. His four fingers unfastened the loosened knot first. Then he carefully made two bunny ears. Crossed the one over the other. Pulled one loop through the bottom hole away from each other. At the end, he smoothed the front bunny ear. 

There was a Napoleonic naturalness in his boot-tying action, described in *War and Peace*. The officer was a neat man anyway. His face looked freshly-shaved as the day before. He had a neat handwriting, Shelley spotted earlier. 

The officer got back into his chair. ‘‘Look, you’ll remember me in your whole life for the favor I will do you now.’’ He paused. He watched Shelley for the reaction of his words. ‘‘You walk free from here. No charge, no court, nothing. Just one small condition.’’ 

Shelley looked straight at the officer, unblinking. His brow creased. He heard police had many faces. Here the officer was showing a clean and kind face. ‘‘Never again contact the girl. Never means N-E-V-E-R. In your entire life, never. If you can ensure me that, you are free to go. N-O-W.’’ 

‘‘But, if you go free and get in touch with her by any means, you’re bloody dead.’’ Here another police face appeared over his uniform, unkind and unfeeling. ‘‘I’ll make your life worse than hell. I’ll put you under Security Act. You know what that means. As an enemy of Pakistan your whole life will be in prison then.’’ 

Shelley thought. He looked at the portrait above the officer’s head. If the officer hadn’t migrated from India there would have been a different portrait over his head. A portrait of nonviolence. Shelley made his decision. What he needed was to get out of here at any price. 

‘‘Which one would you go for?’’ the officer asked after a silence. 

Shelley took more time to reply. ‘‘The first one.’’ 

The officer smiled for the first time. A small police smile. And told Shelley he was a good head on his shoulders. In the end, the officer showed his friendly and gentleman-looking face. Un-police and unprofessional face. ‘‘You want a good advice from me? As a good friend?’’ 

Shelley gave a nonchalant nod. 

‘‘Move to India. Trust me. That would be good for you. If I wanted I could have sent you to court now. But, I once migrated here from India. I know how it feels like. I have my sympathy for you.’’ 

Shelley sort of smiled and said he would give it a thought. And he hesitated. He hesitated to walk free from the police station. Because he had the impression that *yesterday* had been long, long days ago. In that instant, he felt that he didn’t belong to the outer world. He belonged to the prison cell, a world within a world—a world of knowledge. He wished to say goodbye to the cold-faced dacoit man. But that would be too much now. 

Shelley walked in the streets under the sky. The air was fresh, it smelled jasmine. His mind was already set. He would soon start for Gopala, to look for his wife Sufi. 