From: Aldeena Raju <chrysalis11@gmail.com>
Date: 1 April 2015 at 21:02
Subject: Re: Submission
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>


*Smoke and Ash* 

It was a cloudy Friday night. They had just tucked into some grub at Phoenix after Vik’s standup at Canvas. Outside they snucked a beer each from Foodhall and hid it under the backseat of Snookie’s car. Vik stood at the cigarette shop with a lit iceburst wedged between two fingers. Naina would make fun of him saying it was a girlie cig to smoke as she lit up her Classic. Feroze and Deb laughed and got into the car. Snookie started the engine and turned towards them. ‘What say we hit Carter Road next?’ Feroze grinned and said, ‘Ya man. Been a while now.’ Naina looked up at the sky, ‘I think there’s going to be a storm tonight,’ she said, taking in the heavy, dark clouds that adorned the horizon. 

They stopped at Worli for another smoke. The sky was purple when lightning struck, a wave of fluorescence that made them all glow in its grip for a few seconds. Snookie sat on the top of the car and watched the sea with one palm under the chin, the other balancing a beer and a cig. Vik stretched a leg on the concrete, watched a chip get dislodged and roll down towards Feroze, took a deep drag and said, ‘You guys wanna smoke up?’ Deb grinned and gave him a friendly kick and said, ‘Why the fuck were you making me drink beer all this while you bastard!’ Vik laughed as Snookie tossed him the car keys. The lanes were still as they drove in to Vik’s house to pick up the stash. Vik’s sneakers made squishy noises as he walked in to take the elevator. Feroze took a wad of gum from his mouth and stuck it on Naina’s shirt.  She squealed and gave him a whack on the back of his head and then stuck the piece on his face. There were still sticky reminders hugging the fabric of her shirt, refusing to let go. 

Lights went on in the ground-floor house and a pretty expletive rang out from somewhere in the building. 

Five minutes later, Vik ran out muttering under his breath, got into the car, shut the door and started the engine. ‘Which one of you morons was it that just screamed bloody murder!’ he asked as he turned the car onto the main road. Deb sniggered and Naina scowled. Feroze pretended to be sleepy and Snookie tossed the box of tissues at him. The car turned into the Sea Link and all of them quietly looked at the white beams towering above as they drove by. Distant twinkling lights reminded them they were still on land. 

Mumbai was perhaps at its most glorious best after midnight. It was when Vik loved it the most. There were days when he would go alone to Marine Drive and lie on the embankment gazing up at the sky, listening to the sound of the sea as it rumbled against the walls. Naina though loved Bombay the most at early dawn. The colours of the sky merged with the colours of the ocean and created a palette that could not be replicated by man. She would drive out to the beach when it was still dark and watch the sun come up. Sometimes it made her feel so insignificant. What was man in the face of something so magnificent, something so perfect. 

The city was quiet. The roads were less habited, people on the roads fewer. Yellow and black dotted the crossings they passed. There was something so reassuring about the pace. Snookie had dozed off on Deb’s shoulder so he gently nudged her awake as Vik parked the car. There was still a bustle in Carter Road. Dots of people lined the dirty beach, taking in the cold breeze. The stormy weather had caused the sea to move in a little. They had not checked what time it was. The CCD was shut so it was definitely past two in the night. 

They walked down the shore until they found a free spot, or ‘parking space’, as Feroze called it. Deb and Vik sat on the rocks while Snookie, Naina and Feroze sat perched on the wall. The sea was getting angrier as the weather inched towards rain. Sometimes the wave would bring with it a spray of sea water. The skies were a musty, dense grey. Vik took a drag and passed the joint. He could feel it rush through his lungs, banging against his insides, like a monster aching to emerge. They stretched out over the pavement and the ledge, enveloped in smoke. Naina always stopped when she started feeling slightly dizzy. ‘That Parimal is such a douche, man. He was totally checking out my mother at Nikki’s party yesterday. I would have punched his nose in’, Feroze said staring at the sky, punching a rock instead. ‘Ha! He touched my ass last Diwali,’ Deb said laughing. Vik’s eyes grew large. ‘And?’ he asked. ‘I kicked his,’ said Deb laughing even louder. 

‘Do you think polar bears like ice?’ Snookie mumbled, her head hidden in a cloak of smoke. ‘Not like there is a choice’, said Naina, flicking her cigarette and stubbing it. 

The waves kept rolling in closer. There was a clap of thunder. And then lighting blazed like fireworks across the sky. They watched in a haze; it almost felt like a dream. 

Naina sat up suddenly and leaned forward, with her gaze planted firmly on the ocean ahead. ‘How many steps do you think it takes a human to be wiped off the face of the earth,’ she asked. Vik turned his head lazily and said, ‘Boom! That’s all it takes’. ‘No, but seriously. How many steps do you think?’ 

Feroze scratched his arm, looked at Naina, leaned back, arching towards the sky and said, ‘I guess technique matters’. 

Naina leaned towards Feroze, eyes glazed as if in a trance and said, ‘Say I walk into the ocean, how many steps do you think it will take?’ 

Deb groaned and spoke up, ‘But you know swimming, Nain! You can’t disappear!’ 

Naina went quiet for a few minutes. She then looked at Snookie and said, ‘Tie my hands behind my back with your scarf’. 

Vik brushed his sand across the sand and waited. Snookie wordlessly pulled the scarf off her neck and tied Naina’s hands behind her back. 

Naina smiled and asked, ‘Now? How many?’ 

Deb looked at the sea in silence for some time and then turned saying, ‘Thirty-five, I think’. 

‘No, forty.’ Vik quipped. 

By this time, Naina had stood up and stood where the waves kissed the shore. ‘Start counting’ she shouted over the sound of the breeze. One! She stepped forward into the cold water. Two! Both feet were immersed. Three! Vik took a long drag and passed it to Deb. Four! 

Naina stumbled as a rough wave hit her. Five! Snookie drew a smiley with her toe on the dirty sand. Six! 

Twenty-five! Suddenly Vik sat up and looked at the water. ‘What the fuck is she doing!’ he screamed. ‘Naina,’ he shouted, but the figure in the water did not turn its head. Thirty-three! Deb was still counting when Feroze slapped him awake. 

*By the time we realized what was happening all we could see was waves all around. Vik tried swimming in to save her but the waters were too choppy. The policeman on duty called for help as we tried to explain what had just happened. Memories were hazy. I remembered Deb shouting the number ‘thirty-three’. And I remembered the look on Naina’s face as she looked at the sea. We searched for days but there was no sign of her. Local lore in some places says that the sea returns everything it claims within three days. We went back every day for three weeks, hoping for a sign. But she had vanished. Never to be seen again.* 

*So how many steps does it take for a human to vanish off the face of this earth? Thirty-three. We counted.* 

