From: Arjun Rajendran <arjun.rajendran@gmail.com>
Date: 31 March 2015 at 12:19
Subject: Short story submission: Narona's Turtle
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com
Bio: Arjun Rajendran's first collection of poems, "Snake Wine", was published by the Zaporogue Press in 2014. This is his first short story. 

*NARONA'S TURTLE* 

When John Paul Narona, in a tone of Portuguese loathing, warned me his mother told him god would strike me down for entrapping him with a sick turtle, I asked him, in no uncertain terms, to fuck off. True, I knew the animal was dying but in a rare moment of business acumen, I relinquished all my ethics since the loss could be quantified to two months of allowance which at the time was a hundred and fifty rupees. Enough to buy a fancy aerator, like the Chinese fisherman, his fishing rod pushed up by the release of air bubbles, the farting mermaid, the psychedelic disc resembling crazy weight machines in railway stations or the boy aerating with his small cock. 

As things went, I was the one who was normally suckered. Like the time Rohit, the owner of Sagar Arcade, where kids from the Dadar area expended considerable resources to triumph over 16-bit video games like Streets of Rage, Shinobi III, Aladdin and Mortal Kombat, resold my game cartridges for ten times the price. Or when the school librarian charged me the full MRP for a lost book just because in her eyes, I looked like a rich kid. And the numerous occasions when classmates dropped in unannounced and scrutinized my father’s cupboard under my nose, pilfering all the change they could or a watch or two- A few minutes on the phone was distraction enough for the old HMT and the new Titan to be measuring time just as faithfully in a guilty pocket- it might have felt less exploitative if these instruments, crafted with such precision, could posses even the slightest bit of cognition to rebel, in however small a way they could, against a burglar’s wrist. 

In any case, whether I’d grown tired of my own gullibility or not, despite the fact that John Paul Narona had never sought to take advantage of me in any way, he became a victim of my false marketing. I think he subsequently forgave me for the wrong I did him but now that I think about it, he was an easy target to pick on- emaciated, boastful, swollen with false piety and somehow, always getting under your skin.  He’d often irritate you with dumb shit like “let’s form a club”, “what kind of club?” I’d ask him and he’d say grinning, “a club of studs”. And when I’d remind him he wasn’t exactly Bollywood material he’d brag about some fictitious girls in mass. infatuated with him. He also splurged on idiotic stuff like color shifting keychains-black for anger, rose for flirtation, red for love, yellow for friendship,that kind of thing and eventually it’d end up with any of us-me, or Alston, or Majid or a thug like Sanjay Sharma who hung around streets near Portuguese church trying to pawn off used Debonairs to prepubescent kids. 

On another occasion, Alston and I had this brainwave to con residents of housing societies. Through some basic cut and paste (the pre-computer era kind) from a Sanctuary magazine, we fashioned a professional looking donation form- and if they’d ask us for details I suggested our beneficiaries  were the Hornbill and The Indian Rhinoceros- but just as we were about to ring bells, John Paul Narona waxed eloquent about police torture: how they first pull out your eyebrows, then soak you up with electricity and if you’re still breathing, they’ll turn your arsehole into a home for paperweights, staples and any other stationary lying around. Then, with renewed delirium, he impressed upon us how staunchly his poor ma believed in retribution, the innumerable guises of the antichrist and other such delightful tidbits issued with enough conviction to elevate her seamstress soul a little above the dinginess of their existence, how he was such a model pupil in catechism class and how much more certain he was that he’s in bad company so, after a good half day of planning, craft and dreams, the whole thing fizzled out; just-like-that. 

Then there was the carpentry incident- how he hammered away for an hour or two in my room until the floor lay buried under a carpet of sawdust, bent nails, netting and glue-the promised mice cage just wouldn’t materialize. “are you sure you’re up for this?”, I’d asked him, somehow trusting him to save me a trip to Crawford market and he assured me he was. Eventually, the pair of white mice decided to fashion their own homes,spelunking behind comics,gnawing through glossy Raduga covers, handkerchiefs and posters, turning my miniature library into a temple of feces. 

* 

Not long after the turtle had become a pulp of fungus and heartbreak, I received a curious visitor one afternoon. The man appeared to be in his early twenties and at first, I thought nothing of him. Somehow, he’d heard about my aquariums and wanted to see them for himself. This, to me, was a moment of intense pride; that a stranger should come to my door meant I was probably someone important in the Bombay world of fish keeping. After all, I owned five tanks-two made of silicon [the absence of the metal frame around the edges made for a richer viewing experience]. Though I’d never really succeeded in breeding any of my fishes barring the stoical guppy and some Siamese fighters [eventually, the mother devoured all her offspring but that’s besides the point]. On the other hand, the angels were usually the first to depart, followed by neon tetras named for their resplendent blue bands reminiscent of flash storms or bursts of color in magic shows. Such pretty creatures but ever so delicate- a small mistake in equalizing the temperature between the water in the plastic bag they’re sold in and the water in your tank, and they’d be as dead as Reynold pen caps lying under seats of local trains. 

“You are quite the hobbyist”, he told me, sitting at the edge of my bed; the scent of the tide wafted in through a slight opening in the window . “I have a diploma in fish keeping- A to Z (he pronounced it “jhee”)”. 

I spoke to him in English; he replied in Hindi. But I'd always cuss in Hindi and he'd just laugh in the vernacular. 

“But why do you keep plastic plants?”, he asked me, not making any effort to mask the disappointment in his voice. 

“They’re cheap, and easy to clean, besides,they never have to be replaced” 

“Yes,but have you considered”, he said,in a humid, altruistic tone,  “how a tiger lotus would complement that little stone castle your cichlids have inaugurated-or how ferns could incite your goldfish to be more fertile, or even your black moors for instance; see, the one whose tail is being nibbled by that Guppie, doesn’t her movement remind of you of a *dupatta* blown away from a clothes string? 

And if I were you, I’d dump those fancy aerators of yours- they’re made of the cheapest plastic and apart from being toxic, they will not oxygenate your tank. How often do you clean it, by the way?” 

And so it went. Debates on worms versus daphne (passed off as “Sea Monkeys”in vintage American comic ads). The pairing of ramaroji with blue gourami. Orange pebbles and golden snails. Moss. Feeding cones. Eels and red tail sharks. Dechlorination. 

At first, the man visited once a week. Other than catering to aquariums in petrol pumps and restaurants, he was also a bodybuilder. Soon, he became a mentor of sorts-teaching me how to scrub tanks properly and guiding my choice of equipment. In fact, I never suspected that in a month, he’d clean me out- take all my tanks, fishes, aerators, pebbles, nets, plants, feed and disappear, leaving me with nothing more than a visiting card and the indelible feeling of betrayal. 

How that came about is still not clear to me. Perhaps black magic truly only dwells in rhetoric. As I mentioned before, I was no stranger to getting duped but never like that. Why, I even helped the guy carry all my stuff down the service elevator. I’d traded everything I’d labored on for years, all that walking to Tropical Fish Center, all my prize goldfish, their silver and orange scales shaped like maps of countries that are only situated in the deepest recesses of the imagination, for what? A rabbit. I could’ve bought a small rabbit farm if I’d sold my aquariums to an independent buyer and somehow, the more I think about how I could’ve let myself be duped, the less I understand- as if all my powers of reasoning and common sense had been windswept like ragged baniyans off a clothesline. 

When I tried the number on his visiting card, the voice at the other end told me he’d left for Dubai. Well he can’t you see, I tried telling them,he owes me a fucking rabbit. Tell him I’m going to the police…” . Then, only an eternal silence. 

* 

Shortly afterwards, walking home from school, John Paul Narona thought I was making all of it up to win his sympathy. “Come see for yourself”, I told him, “swear on my mother, I don’t even have a tube to siphon out water”. His exact words were, “go make someone else a *chutiya*”. 

“You know, that turtle I sold you, you killed it, you and your stupid ma”, I spitefully said. 