From: Preksha Sharma <preksha.sharma88@gmail.com>
Date: 20 February 2015 at 19:15
Subject: SUBMISSION
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>
Bio: Preksha belongs to a small, troubled part of the world, Jammu and Kashmir. She has worked as an associate editor for a design magazine based in Bombay. Her poem has been published by British Council and Sampad Press in a book, *Inspired by Tagore*. She has also curated an art exhibition held at Designyatra, Goa in 2013. Currently, she is travelling her home state, discovering the local literature, and working towards finishing her first novel.

The Suicide 

The decision was made. The date was set to be the 4th of July for two reasons. First, it was after the 2nd, her birthday, which also marked the mid of the year. And second, for all practical purposes, K and she would have enough time to set their affairs in order. 

By four in the morning she was at her writing desk, caught in a stray, fleeting ecstasy, probably a residual of previous night’s celebrations. She felt light and happy, like a helium balloon. And she felt sure. In her mind she carefully memorized this feeling and later visited it, as a devotee would visit a shrine, when anyone tried to rattle her faith in her decision. It took all of her writing time that week to plan each day that was to be lived. First thing to do was to tell K. 

On Sunday morning, while they were still in the bed, she and K had slow, unhurried sex. Sexual intimacy was a forgotten thing between them until a week back. The day she had made the decision she initiated and they made passionate love. Then it followed, each day, the entire week. Like a honeymoon. By Saturday K was sure that something big was coming his way. On Sunday when she held him from behind and rubbed his thighs, he did not return her advances. She was resolute; he gave in. After brief, anticipatory sex, she nuzzled into his neck and whispered, ‘You know I have decided.’ 

She spoke to him as a mother would explain her young son something terrible, like why she needs to die of cancer and he needs to go an orphanage or something like that. K was erased inside, blank. After a while, he gathered himself and managed to bring out the fury. He ranted about unfairness cowardice shame crime love support pity junk jargon everything; and then he pleaded, begged. Her know-it-all motherly gaze was fixed somewhere else, on her invisible son maybe, oblivious of K. She stopped abruptly when she felt insects trailing her lower abdomen towards further down. It was his tears. His head was dug between her breasts. He was mumbling, ‘Suicide was to be the last resort…it was never to be… you can’t, I won’t let you.’ She kissed him softly on his head and gently rubbed his back. 

* 

Her father slapped her with a stiff hand. It was her first slap, and she could see it took considerable effort. He, and her mother tucked close to him, were beating in a rhythm. Lub-dub-lub-dub-lub-dub, she sang in her mind. 

‘This is preposterous,’ her father cried, ‘you can’t take your own life. It is the most, most heinous crime. I am ashamed. I am,’ he said. 

‘Why can’t I Papa? As a human I can,’ she spoke calmly, ‘I have a mind powerful enough to facilitate. This stigma against suicide is just another of society’s idiocies, like, I don’t know, sati or umm…child marriage. And will you be comparatively less ashamed if I molested a child?’ 

‘This …this thinking…is insanity…this…this…this is barbarism. It’s a sin,’ he stammered in rage. His head was pounding; he could burst and bleed into his brain. 

Her gaze was fixed on a vein throbbing in his temple. Lub-dub-lub-dub-lub-dub…it was stuck. 

‘How will you do it? Tell me,’ he was shouting, ‘Tell your father. Tell! Tell your mother here. Will you slit your wrist, or throat, or will you jump off a building? Tell me what glorious end have you thought of our love? Do us a favour and please kill us first.’ 

The clock hand slayed many seconds; everyone remained still at the outside. Finally she said, ‘I will see the best way through which K can have his insurance, and his dignity.’ 

Nothing more was said that day. In the middle of the night she woke up to heavy whispers and choking throats. K was not in the bed. In the living room he and her parents were discussing possible solutions. A rehabilitation center was being discussed, rooms with single occupancy, 24 hours surveillance, two hours of daily personal counselling. Their voices were devoid of conviction. ‘Is this what we will have to do to keep her alive? Keep her from killing herself,’ K said. ‘I feel like killing myself,’ he said. 

Next morning she found her father waiting for her in the kitchen. He was drunk. He had not slept at all. 

‘Beta, if you are not satisfied with your life, you can move ahead, find someone else, we all…’ He saw K coming down the stairs and stopped. K looked washed out, out of a coffin. She made them breakfast. K filled his spoons and emptied them in his mouth. No other motion was visible in him. Her father stared into K’s eyes to check if he was blinking. He was. She announced at the table that for their anniversary she and K are going for a trip to Europe. No one said anything. 

* 

After the Europe trip K left his job. 

Her parents decided to stay till things got okay or got over. 

The day she had to tell her best friend, Em, arrived. It went as expected. Em pursed her lips to suppress her fake laughter, moved her eye-balls corner to corner to see if someone would give away the joke. Then it began, the panic, the aggression, the conversation: 

‘What is wrong with you woman? How can you think like that? Seriously, how? This is a crime you know! What will happen if all women start to think like you?’ 

‘All women? Thinking? Hah! Wouldn’t that be anarchy?’ 

‘Stop it! This is outrageous.’ (Em Crying) ‘What is this about? Please tell us, we are all here for you. You have such a perfect and beautiful life. How many people have that?’ 

‘There is pointlessness in living this beautiful life. This pointlessness makes it impossible to live. Besides if my life is perfect, isn’t it the best time to end it? Those who don’t have it, have a reason to strive for it.’ 

‘Pointlessness? Are we all pointless to you? Uncle -aunty, K? I? We are all pointless? 

‘There is pointlessness in our own selves. See, even our death is not about us. My death is about you, K, papa-mamma.’ 

‘See, if you want to break away from all of this, you can have your freedom, you can leave and stay in I don’t know some wilderness like that Supertramp guy. Just don’t die, okay! We will be torn, but still we will be contented that you are alive.’ 

‘And is that all, staying alive. It is exactly what I don’t want.’ 

‘Then…I don’t know…what do you want…find a purpose. What about your writing? That novel that’s about to come out? Your first! You don’t want to taste the fruits of your hard work?’ 

‘Em, I can’t explain how it is when you are writing a novel, it is the fruit. Rest is vanity.’ 

‘Fuck this shit! Then make yourself useful you selfish female! Do some service! Look out of your privileged life that you don’t care to throw away.’ 

‘I am making a donation to your NGO. It’s already done… my part, Em.’ 

‘You have gone crazy. This is madness. I won’t let you do this. I can’t. I will go to the police, I will do anything it takes. I will…I will tie you down if required.’ 

‘It will take my life either ways.’ 

Conversations of a lifetime were over in a month. At times, voices turned throaty, words bundled together, and someone or the other broke into a painful howl. She hugged them, and consoled and loved them. She felt their pain but what could be done. Death couldn’t be sacrificed. 

Em never left. 

A series of dinners were organized. A firm was hired to manage the parties. Everybody she intended to see before she was dead was called. Expensive gifts were returned. For three days, she wrote personalized thank you notes. Then there were others who were invited to their own surprise - the publisher of the *India* *Insurance Magazine*, her relationship manager at Metro Life Insurance Co, the manager of IDI bank. K did not come out of his room. 

At night, K asked her softly if she wanted anything for her funeral. How will it matter to me, I will be dead, she thought but did not say. How about *khul ja simsim *on my grave, she thought and laughed hard in her mind, but did not say. ‘Anything that gives you peace,’ she replied. 

By next week she had moved some assets on K’s name, some on her parents’. The suicide clause of her insurance policy stated that no death benefit will be paid if the insured commits suicide within two years of taking a policy. Two years were to complete on 15th June. And that would be required only if the suicide was proved. She had planned to stage it as an accident. She was smart enough for that, and for the police. All that was needed was intelligent and meticulous planning. 

* 

A few days passed, maybe a week. No one was counting. 

One night K woke up to the sound of suppressed gasps. Too soft to pull him out of slumber though. Perhaps he wasn’t slumbering at all. A desperate suck of air was followed by strong stunted exhales. On the street below, a motorcycle zoomed; a car stuttered over rumblers. The night fell quiet again. Her cries, painfully clear - almost tangible as a pebble between the fingertips - pierced through the bathroom door and filled the room. 

He walked up to the window. A sack full of stars was spilled above. There was no moon. He thanked the stars. 

After that night, no one saw her out of the bed. The bathroom smelled of her secretions but no one could say when she used it. In the nights, she would silently cry and curl up into fetal position; when K would hug her from behind, he would feel a big throbbing ball between his arms and chest. Her father sighed and nodded his head. ‘The cage that was growing inside of her has finally outgrown. She is now trapped, now free to express,’ he told K, somewhat confused himself. 

A psychiatrist was consulted. The mornings and the noons were spent in blackmailing her into life. She listened but never spoke. K made her breakfast, showed her their wedding album. Her father read her favourite stories and authors since her childhood. Em installed a home theater in her room and played the Bollywood cult she loved to watch. Nothing worked. 

One night K woke up to her gagging. She was vomiting on the floor. Each time she made an effort to throw up, her body gave a strong jerk. K rubbed her back and hugged her tightly. He slept after a long time. Next morning, the house was woken up by a police officer. She was gone. Dead. ‘Jumped off the building,’ was all K could hear as he was hurrying to get on his lowers. A suicide was registered. An inquiry was held. A postmortem was conducted. K was interrogated several times. Her father pleaded his innocence. ‘It is not usual for a pregnant woman to commit suicide unless she fears for her child or herself,’ a sympathetic police officer tried to justify the system. ‘It is not usual…,’ K repeated mindlessly and lost his words. He found a used pregnancy test strip in her diary. He had mistaken it for a bookmark. 

On 22nd June, after almost two months of enquiry, the case was closed. Everyone was exhausted. K never demanded insurance; neither did the company approach him. It helped in winding the case early. Her book was published by then, five months prior to its scheduled date. It became a big deal. The suicide helped in early sales. 

By August K started receiving the royalty checks. Her book made it to the long list of Booker. Her mailbox flooded with hundreds of mails from her fans and readers, all of whom knew that she was dead. Subjects read ‘Your book changed my life’, ‘Geniuses live on’, ‘I feel your pain’, ‘I would do anything to be you’. K received hundreds of mails requesting her pictures, facts, anecdotes, and intellectual essays about her. Websites dedicated to her were hoisted where quotes from her books were written out of context in fancy typefaces and were shared over a hundred thousand times. 

 