From: gaurav deka <gauravdeka.89@gmail.com>
Date: 20 February 2015 at 20:05
Subject: Submission
To: Indira Chandrasekhar <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>
Bio: Gaurav Deka studied medicine at Gauhati Medical College and Hospital. When not writing, he is a practicing psychotherapist. His fictions, poetry and reviews have been published in The Open Road Review, The Tenement Block Review, Café Dissensus, The Four Quarter Magazine, DNA-Out of Print, Northeast Review, and The Solstice Initiative, among others. His fiction To Whom He Wrote From Berlin won The Open Road Review Short Fiction Contest, 2014. He lives in Delhi, India.

“*Until The Moment of Loss*” 

On the fourteenth day when Anju appeared on News Live to talk about her mother’s death, she wore a white salwar and covered her head with the dupatta. Maa, Pulakesh Mama, and Poornima Baido sat so close to the T.V. – weeping silently and wiping one anothers’ tears – that Baba had to scold them for behaving like lunatics.  They held one anothers’ hands as if in preparation for an apocalypse while Anju stared blankly into the camera and told in a voice, completely unlike her, that before her father could run to the bedroom to get the blankets, Moromi Khanikar, her mother, after throwing herself on the burning stove, glowed wildly like an insect held over a candle flame and had collapsed on the floor. The whole house had already started smelling of burnt flesh and Boroplus – that her mother liked applying on her cracked soles before going to bed. And now, since she had already lost her mother, she could no longer afford to lose her father. If need be she’d appear in court to say the same and testify against the empty threats from her mother’s family to her father. News Live reported it as one of the most tragic suicides of the year: The death of the wife of the most loved and powerful candidate from the Hajo Constituency contesting for the 2010 state elections, Dr. Pritam Khanikar. 

A month ago, that year, I had just returned from Dr. Deepen Kalita’s rehab in Sonapur and had still not started going to the wards. I had suddenly developed a pathological aversion to hospitals and couldn’t continue going to the classes. I had flunked my seventh semester examinations and was almost certain I’d give up medicine eventually. My days were spent sleeping on the cold marble floor of the attic to beat the unbearable summer, completely indifferent to my mother’s pleas at resuming college. By six in the evening, I’d wake up and sit down to write my unfinished experimental novel – a series of love letters to a future lover in Auvergne. Baba would be late those days because he’d go to my college after office, to each of my professors from every department and plead them to allow me to sit for the next semester examinations, though I had stopped attending classes and had zero attendance. When he’d come back home, Maa would already be asleep and I, still writing my love letters. I had stopped speaking to him because there was nothing to talk about. He’d never understand how a ‘man’ was capable of breaking my heart and leave me so damaged. Even when Dr. Kalita tried to explain to him, he defended himself furiously, saying that such people are born only in ‘foreign places’ and no one in his family has been ever ‘like that’. This young, thirty-year-old man, Dr. Niloy Bora, who’d come to our place almost every alternate day, was a very good friend and a mentor to his son, he’d tell Dr. Kalita. He was a resident at the department of Microbiology and belonged to a respectable family of lawyers and doctors in Kharguli, Uzanbazar. Such people were dignified, had high moral values and were completely harmless. Such people could never lead anyone down the wrong path. Instead, when he, my father, met Dr. Niloy at the microbiology department a few days after he came to know the whole story from my mother, he seemed genuinely worried that I had stopped going to classes and that my falling grades may affect my career graph as a medical student very badly. “How can such a person be of any harm to my son? This is all rubbish. All these men loving men and women loving women! Nonsense!” He’d shouted at Dr. Kalita and told him that he’d take me to a better psychiatrist. 

On the night I was on the verge of finishing my last love letter, at around 1:00 am, Bimala Baido rang me. She was Poornima Baido’s sister and had been living at Moromi Mahi’s place for the last seventeen years. She was the one who’d brought Poornima Baido to our place when Maa had requested her if she could find a female helper, simple and non-fussy just like her, who would wash and cook for us. Poornima Baido had come to our place first when I was twelve. Since then, she’d been staying with us and had refused to get married and go elsewhere. She’d only go to her village in Koniha twice a year. When her father threatened to cut her out from the family if she didn’t marry Horen, one of his fellow Bhaang-junkies, she stopped going to her village altogether. Seeing Bimala Baido’s number flashing on the screen of my mobile in the middle of the night, I had expected either bad news from her village or something as urgent as a death in the family she’d wanted to tell her sister but was unable to get through her number perhaps. So, I had rushed to Poornima Baido’s bedroom with the ringing mobile clutched tightly in my fist. She was fast asleep. I started calling out her name to which she only turned to the other side of the bed. By the time I had started tapping her back urgently to wake her up, the phone had stopped ringing. 

When she woke up, I asked Poornima Baido to call back her sister, while I stood beside her clasping my mouth, lest I exclaimed in anxiety. Poornima Baido, before uttering a word, with the phone glued to her cheek, let out a shrill cry and dropped to the floor. The phone came crashing down and split into two unequal halves. Even in the dark, in that split second, I could see the horror sucking out the colour of her grim, stony face. When Maa woke up to the chaos and came running into the room, her wails grew louder and longer. She held Maa by her shoulders and spoke in unintelligible, incomplete sentences between her sobs, “Moromi Baido. Jui lagil. Fire. Gas stove. Mormomi Baido. Jui lagil. Fire. Gas stove.” 

That was enough for Maa to scream in horror, flapping her hands like a chicken and shaking her head, as if to shake off what she had just heard. Poornima Baido’s incomplete sentences were enough for Maa to understand that whatever little remained of her world, after her son’s incurable illness, had ultimately fallen apart. The only choice she had was to scream as loud as possible. Scream in agony till the whole world turned deaf, including the voices inside her head. 

When we reached the emergency ward at two in the night, we saw Pritam Moha, standing next to an iron-stretcher covered with a stained green bedsheet and shaking his hands frantically, throwing them into the air, shouting at the medical officer and a couple of interns that in his medical career of twenty years he has saved almost twenty patients with seventy-five percent burn. And that his wife was no different. He could save her as well if his hands could work tonight. As I drew closer I could hear him throwing at them a set of instructions to arrest the dehydration and shock caused by the burning and repeating that the survival of a seventy-five percent burn case was absolutely possible with the correct interventions. When he saw me, he repeated the same and looked at me questioningly, as if seeking my approval of his medical knowledge of twenty years. I turned to look at Maa, who still stood at the entrance leaning on a pillar stained with *choon*. Renu Jethai, who was still in her cream colour Muga Mekhela that she had bought to wear for her son’s wedding that very evening when the incident happened, stood behind Maa holding her by her wrist tightly. When I turned back and didn’t say anything, Pritam Moha slowed his hands down and splayed out his fingers in front of me like a guilty child holding his hands out to the teacher who’d beat him with a ruler. The ends of his fingers were covered in a white paste and I could smell Colgate on them, close to my face. “While I held her from behind, I burnt them bad. Yet I managed to drive the car all the fucking way from Narangi, you see!” He exclaimed to me earnestly, desperate for my response. I still stayed silent, pushed him aside and went up to the stretcher. 

Moromi Mahi, supine and breathing, lay there on the stained green sheet. Her whole body was covered in rolls of fluffed gauze till her neck and including the ends of her fingers. An IV line ran from below her right ankle where the skin was cut to reveal a vein and the needle inserted into it. Rest of the veins in her hands had already collapsed and shrivelled, one of the interns said, when I placed my hands close to her feet. I had still not seen her face. It was the only part of her body that was left uncovered. I could not imagine it any different from what I had seen her last when she’d come to our house, flushed and sweaty, in the middle of a July afternoon. When Maa asked her why hadn’t she bothered to call up once before turning up, she said that she’d been to Fancy Bazar where someone flicked the phone from her purse. And that now she was very tired and very hungry. Maa had offered to heat up some rice and daal from the previous night. But Moromi Maahi asked her serve it the way she liked – a plate of cold rice with two green chillies and a bit of salt on the side. While she chomped with great relish, I sat by her side and looked at the green vein running across the side of her right temple, fading and brightening against her red, pale skin to the movement of her jaw as she masticated. 

Niloy-Da had the same green vein on his left temple. During the time when he’d not met Hiya Das, I’d often visit him at the department. He’d either call or send a junior to my hostel room. One of those days, I’d look at him from the corner of my eyes at the lab, spilling an excess of Carbol-Fuschin on my TB specimen slide. He’d be leaning over a microscope and staring intently into the cluster of germs, adjusting the screws on both sides of the instrument. I’d be staring at the vein and feeling aroused, to which as if by clairvoyance, without raising his head, he’d say softly, “Tourjo, concentrate on your slide. You’re ruining the culture completely.” I’d immediately shift my gaze, cough loudly, frown and furrow my eyebrows to acquire a serious expression and start fixing my slide. That week he’d had to take practical classes for the fifth semester students and had asked me if I could help in preparing a set of mycobacterium slides. After we were done, he’d taken me out to dinner at Citi Dhaba, the only decent, non-spicy restaurant near our hospital. There, he’d told me how much he liked me, for the first time in thirty years he could feel this strongly for another person. 

For a few moments I had been unable to swallow, registering his words in my head and letting them still my heart to death. At night, I had stayed back with him at the PG hostel and called Maa to tell her that I had been appointed night duty at the department. Not many students are given a chance – a way to learn better. I’d asked her not to worry as Niloy-Da was there to give me company. At the hostel, in his wrought iron single bed he held me close, my face pressed to his chest, his powdery chest-hair smelling of Carbol-Fuschin, his hands clasping my behind, and lips pressing at my throat. 

I went back every week, almost every Saturday, and spent my nights at the PG hostel with Niloy-Da. On certain days, he’d go to our place, chat with Baba and stay back. Maa would make the best of her shukto and  duck-meat with sesame seeds and I’d be overjoyed to see Niloy-Da eating with such gusto and becoming a part of our family. I’d imagine living with him for the rest of my life and sleeping in the same wrought iron single bed from the PG hostel which compelled us to sleep pressed against each others’ naked bodies. So close that nothing separated us except the warmth of our skin. In the next many days while I was with him he didn’t speak much about ‘this feeling’ – since that revelation at the Citi Dhaba. He’d spend most of his time at the department staff room and talk for long hours on the phone. In between he’d take a break and ask me to prepare as many slides I could and glide back swiftly to the staff room to resume his chat. We’d have dinner at the hostel mess and not at Citi Dhaba. And after dinner, he’d rather drink a bottle of beer and hurry into the bed with me than discuss anything else. 

Three months later he wrote to me that now that his post graduation was getting over, he planned to get married to Hiya Das whom he had met a month back at a conference in Chennai. When I asked him if everything with me was just a hoax, he’d said such things often happened to lonely men in colleges and hostels. It was just a phase. That it was an experimental, transitional phase of life that I must get over too and find a girl for myself. 

When I’d stopped going to college, Moromi Maahi asked Maa to send me over to their place. “A change of environment might just make him change his mind, Baido.” She’d try to placate Maa. “And seeing his Moha do so well, I’m sure he’d feel inspired. You mustn’t worry so much!” Maa would request her not to tell ‘things’ about me to Pritam Moha or Renu Jethai who lived near her. Not just about not going to college but other ‘things’ too. Moromi Maahi would reassure her by saying that no one better than her could understand how puerile hearts worked. 

On my arrival in their newly built house in Narangi, Anju was thrilled to see me at the door. She said to me that in me she found the perfect carefree, broad-minded cousin with whom she could discuss her numerous affairs at school. That she liked this boy, Himanshu, from Hindustan Kendriya Vidyalaya, whom her mother disliked vehemently because he smoked weed. It disturbed her so much that she felt like running away from the house and not care the least about her mother. I’d listen to her silently and not say anything. At night, Moromi Maahi would ask me to sleep with her in the bed. She’d rub my head, run her fingers through my hair and tell me how she had always desired a son like me. She’d hold me close and weep saying that her husband didn’t love her anymore. She was certain that he had something fishy going on with Namita, a widowed nurse from Bonda who worked at the same asbestos company hospital where Pritam Moha was posted as a senior Medical Officer. For days he’d stay away from home saying that he’s campaigning at Hajo for the upcoming elections. And when he’d return he’d only quarrel with Moromi Maahi and accuse her of shackling ‘his’ daughter’s freedom and making her feel miserable by not letting her meet her friends. 

Anju would be sitting at the dining table, silently eating her pasta, and feeling absolutely content that her mother received just the right treatment she deserved from her father. She could not care less since she started seeing the boy from Hindustan Kendriya Vidyalaya, Moromi Maahi would tell me, rubbing the soles of her feet with Boroplus. 

Her soles weren’t burnt though. Infact her entire lower half was spared. One of the interns told me that even her pubic hair was left intact and unscathed when they brought her in. When I asked him if I could see it, he didn’t allow me and said that I could attend the post-mortem later. Suddenly I felt my mouth going dry. Felt my breath fading out of my body into the thick air of the emergency ward filled with the smell of formalin and acetone. It felt like the smell of death. I felt my intestines uncoiling. Felt like throwing up. I held my stomach and bent down to puke. Two other interns came running and held me from behind. Nothing but plain tart tasting water came up to my mouth which I swallowed back and got up. I thanked the two of them and asked them to stay for a while, while I looked at Moromi Maahi’s face. 

She no longer had that vein on her right temple. Her face only looked like an ugly vegetable, a roasted brinjal. She had no eyes. No nose. No lips. Only the hollow of her black mouth open and breathing forcefully. Inside, plain dark soot covered the cavity blackening her gums, teeth and the remnants of her tongue. And I could feel that the little hope that still held my heart in place was finally fading away, like her faint breath. I stood there defeated, unable to step ahead and turned back to look at Maa and Renu Jethai, gesturing them to come near and see their dying sister for one last time. But both of them shook their heads silently, and stood by the pillar holding onto it. Maa pulling the end of her saree to her face and holding it tightly to her mouth as if gagging herself. To stifle the screams of agony that broke her completely from the rest of the world. Renu Jethai, with her head on Maa’s shoulders staring into the clinical whiteness of the tube lights in the room. Everything in white moving in haste against the stillness of death. 

Moromi Maahi passed away at eight in the morning. Maa and Renu Jethai still couldn’t dare see her face. When they took her away in another dirty green stretcher from the ward, Maa ran behind screaming expletives first at the ward boys, calling them inhuman, and when they were gone, she sat on the cold wet floor of the ward and screamed at Pritam Moha for killing her sister. He hung his head low and kept quiet. He didn’t say anything to defend himself. He didn’t weep. Didn’t break down like Maa and Renu Jethai. Pulakesh Mama and Baba had reached the hospital by then. They had gone to fetch my grandfather from his house in Rangia. He didn’t weep either but said earnestly that he wanted to see Maahi’s burnt face. Pulakesh Mama, his only son, said that it’s better he didn’t see her. Grandfather didn’t argue with him. Instead, he sat down silently next to Pritam Moha and stared at Maa, still crying, lying on the floor. 

Baba had to rush to pull her up. Renu Jethai ran quickly ahead to help him raise her. She then held Maa’s head close to her breasts and asked her to cry as much as she could. While Maa’s wails grew louder, Pulakesh Mama came near me and asked if I had Bimala Baido’s number. He asked me to call her up and let ‘them’ know. Tell her to call up the other people and inform them as well, he said. I looked at him for sometime, thinking he’d say something about Anju, but when he turned away, I walked out of the ward, through the driveway up to the parking lot. 

The sun had still not come out, the air was damp with the watery darkness of dawn, and I could see puddles of muddy water collecting by the row of freshly washed ambulances, glistening. I walked up to an empty spot and stood there looking at my phone screen. Without trying to imagine what I’d say to her, I tried dialling Bimala Baido’s number. But felt my fingers turning numb. I considered going back to the ward and telling Pulakesh Mama that I can’t. I can’t call anyone or tell anyone of Moromi Maahi’s death. I’d ask him to call himself. Just as I paced ahead contemplating how I’d tell him this, forming the right words in my head, a blue Maruti car moved in. I remembered I had seen it before, been in it for the first evening when it was bought. We had been to Urvashi Restaurant at Kharghuli, near his house for a change and not to Citi Dhaba. It was the evening when he’d quoted a line from Virgil’s *Doomed Love*, which strangely had left me depressed for the whole night. Inspite of the passionate love we made.*“To have died once is enough.”* 

As I saw Niloy-Da getting down the car, nothing actually stirred inside me, the way it had been the first day at Citi Dhaba when he’d told me about ‘this feeling’. He too saw me standing there and for a moment he’d seemed to froze. I turned away and took out the last cigarette for the night that I had preserved to get me through with the love letters to my imaginary lover in Auvergne. Knowing completely that he was still there looking at me, I lit it. As I took in a long, uncontrolled drag and exhaled, I felt the strength returning to my fingers. I felt my joints opening and something dissolving in my head. I stubbed the cigarette in half and took out my phone once again. Before dialling Bimala Baido’s number, I decided I no longer wanted to write those letters. I no longer needed to. I’d decided I’d burn them and throw the ashes into the wind. It was quite easy to kill. And to have died once was, quite rightly, enough. 

 