From: sreenidhi srinivasan <nidhi.srinivasan@gmail.com>
Date: 7 February 2015 at 02:08
Subject: SUBMISSION
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com
Bio: Sreenidhi is a lawyer and writer based in New Delhi. 

The Letter 


I looked at the watch for the thirty-first time in the past five minutes. He was late. Maybe he wasn’t planning on showing up. I had consciously planned for this evening for an entire month. If you think that sounds neurotic, let me raise the stakes--I reckon I’d been subconsciously planning this evening for the past two decades. 

Raymond Plath had been an enigma to the world. To me, he was so much more. I was sixteen when I first chanced upon his novel *The Argonaut Conundrum*. I was one of those kids who would prefer the company of books over people and would find myself spending countless hours after school at the nearby café-cum-bookstore. The owner was somehow extremely fond of me. She would greet me with a steaming hot cup of cocoa and would let me sit and read in a corner without any trouble. I picked up *The Argonaut Conundrum* on the suggestion of a complete stranger and that too, only because I was fascinated by his pronounced British accent and white skin. I had seen several foreigners before in the city but this was the first time one found me worthy enough to initiate a conversation with. 

That conversation and his suggestion changed my life. I was enthralled by *Conundrum*. Very simply put, the novel was styled like a fictional account of two young men who happened to be twins, born and raised in the same household. One young man was a rational decision-maker who sought maximum utility, was free from personal bias, and was insusceptible to emotion or third persons’ influence, essentially the rational man found in economic theories. The other young man was the antithesis of rational. Highly emotional and easily influenced by others, this man was prone to taking decisions based on feelings rather than reason. 

While their lives start out similarly under the same roof, they take on wildly different routes owing to the choices they make over the years. But an event occurs that brings them both to the exact same position as the other. Plath went on to conclude that ‘choice’ and ‘decision-making’ were rather illusory concepts and sought to blur the lines between a person making a decision and the decision being made. 

While I disagreed with his ideas, I was also deeply affected by his writing. I wrote an elaborate letter making up possible choices the two men could have taken prior to the event keeping in with their behavioural patterns. These choices, in my opinion, would have resulted in different outcomes for them both upon occurrence of the event. I spent days rewriting and perfecting the letter without any hope of actually being able to reach out to him. Yet, with the help of my sympathetic father, I posted the letter to *Conundrum’s* publisher. 

I went on with my life albeit with the discovery that I enjoyed writing as much as I did reading. A few months down the line, I found a large envelope waiting for me at home when I returned from school. It was from Plath. 

In that moment, I felt like a true achiever. I had put my heart and soul into my letter to him, and I’d been rewarded with the ultimate reward for my hard work--a response. His letter to me was sharp and incisive. To every choice I had put forth, he had a ready counter-argument. Yet, his words lacked the usual bite and the sardonic tone which his novel was laced with. The subtext within his words was clear, that he had found my arguments worthy enough to have taken the pains of replying, and to my sixteen-year old self, this was an epochal event. 

My life began to revolve around his reply. I read and re-read it several times each day. I considered writing to him again, this time more optimistic about my chances of reaching him. But the fear of sounding foolish and saying something that would be dismissed by him as unworthy held me back from writing another letter. I wished to revel in my newfound discovery of someone else’s belief in my worth, that too someone who I held in high esteem. 

Time wore on. I studied journalism and took up writing as a profession. Plath did not write another book after *The Argonaut Conundrum*. He gave no interviews and lived the quiet life of a recluse. Over the years, several enthusiastic journalists, writers, economists and fans sought to reach out to him but he consistently denied all offers. He had written no articles before or after the novel. By all accounts, *Conundrum* was his only published material. This in itself was a stunning revelation. It made his response to my juvenile letter all the more precious. 

My father once suggested to me the idea of getting Plath’s reply to my letter published. I must confess the idea was rather enticing. The publication and announcement to the world would have placed me on a different pedestal. The world could view me the way I had viewed myself all these years--on a higher plane owing to my past history with the enigmatic author. 

However no sooner had I begun to consider the idea, I discarded it. I was a sixteen-year old boy again who wished to keep this letter for his own viewing. Why should I have to share Plath with the rest of the world? He had legions of fans who had been trying to reach out to him for years. But to my knowledge, they had all been unsuccessful. Plath had chosen me for a conversation with him to the exclusion of all others. To make the letter public would be like breaching his implicit trust in me. And so I kept my secret hidden. 

Somewhere along the way, I met and fell in love with a beautiful woman. I introduced her to Plath and *Conundrum*. She failed to share my enthusiasm regarding the novel. I loved her a little lesser from then on. Somewhere along the way, we got married. I told her about my letter to Plath and his fantastic reply. Yet again she failed to share my enthusiasm regarding what I perceived as invaluable. I loved her far lesser from then on. 

A few months back my wife and I were visiting her brother in London. I decided to head off to Surrey where, according to my sources, a certain reclusive author had formed base. I knew that several others before me had attempted to meet him by knocking on his front door but they’d all been turned down. But I felt I had an edge over them all, having already had the privilege of a personal interaction with him. Nevertheless, I was a bundle of nerves when I rang the bell to what I understood to be his house. 

A middle-aged woman, his wife, answered the door. 

“Yes?” she smiled at me. 

I knew she was an Indian and was from Mysore. I took a shot in the dark. I spoke to her in Kannada asking her if this was Raymond Plath’s house. It worked. She beamed at me and responded enthusiastically in the affirmative. She invited me inside for a cup of coffee and asked me where I was from, what I did, and how I had landed up there. Upon hearing of my manic interest in Plath, she gave me a commiserating smile and said, “He’s not in town at the moment. I’m afraid he really doesn’t like meeting people. I doubt he can be persuaded to meet you.” 

I begged with her, “Please tell him my name and that I’ve come all the way from India to meet him. Please ma’am.” I hoped he’d remember me as the sixteen-year boy from India who he already knew. 

She sighed, “I’ll see what I can do. Leave your number and e-mail id. I’ll let you know if he miraculously comes around.” 

I expressed my eternal gratitude to her and left. We were back in India and I’d all but given up hope of ever meeting him. And then one day out of the blue Mrs. Plath actually called me. He had agreed to meet me briefly. Which is why a month later, I found myself sitting on a bench outside his farm glancing at my watch every other second. Finally, he arrived half an hour late. 

“You have fifteen minutes. I have to get back in before seven.” 

Suddenly at a loss for words, I searched my brain for some intelligent-sounding words. I asked him a few questions about *Conundrum* which he answered largely in monosyllables and pithy sentences. Yet this was far more than the world had ever been granted. For the second time in my life, he had considered me worthy. 

We were fast approaching the end of my fifteen minutes with him. It was now or never. I had to know if he remembered my sixteen-year old self. My entire life had been built around his validation of my letter, and I was convinced that my insight, inexperienced as it was, formed a minor part of his life. 

“Sir, if you don’t mind me asking, why did you consent to this meeting? I mean I’m extremely grateful and feel privileged but you’ve refused so many before me. I couldn’t help but wonder why me.” 

He gave me a look that made it clear he thought me stark raving mad. I was sure he would just up and leave without so much as a word. But then he suddenly said, “Aren’t you my wife’s second cousin’s son? She threatened to throw me out if I refused to meet her nephew.” 

Wow, nephew it seems. That woman was quite something. Ignoring this, I shamelessly ploughed on, “Oh was that the only reason? You see Sir, many many years ago, right after your book had been released, I’d sent you a letter. I thought you might remember me.” I finished stupidly cursing inwardly for having said that last part out loud. 

“Letter? Son, I hardly ever read anything sent by crazed fans.” 

“But… but you sent me a reply.” 

He laughed, “A reply? Oh wait. My youngest, Ed, who must have been fifteen at the time enjoyed reading these crazy letters. Idiot boy.  I remember he would pester me about the letters and make up responses filled with utter nonsensical garbage. It must have been him that replied to you.” 

With that, he exited the scene, blissfully unmindful of the fact that he had just delivered a sucker punch. The same Raymond Plath who had once seemingly convinced a young boy of his worth had today pulled the proverbial rug from below the boy’s feet. And he had left me behind to grapple with the sheer weight of the discovery that I was ordinary. I took out ‘his’ letter from my pocket and read it again. 

*** 

Four months later, I was making the morning coffee when my wife barged in with the paper. 

“Look this has come out!” 

I smiled as I read the headline, ‘Enigmatic author Raymond Plath writes to sixteen-year old: Writer publishes text from the reclusive author’s letter to him twenty years ago’. 

