From: aazeen <afkirmani@gmail.com>
Date: 13 February 2015 at 17:33
Subject: SUBMISSION
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com
Bio: I began writing at age fourteen and my writings (fiction/non-fiction) were published in city editions of TOI, HT, Pioneer and Indian Express and also in Bhavan's Journal of Bhartiya Vidya Bhavan. I wrote for 7 years then took a hiatus from writing to be able to concentrate on marriage, motherhood and studies. Qualification wise I have a Masters in Economics and a SET certificate for AP and Telangana States. But my most notable achievements are my two little ones , a seven years old son and a three years old daughter ! I am currently residing in Hyderabad along with my kids and husband and dividing my time between reading, writing and potty training! 

THE EVIL ONE 

Sundari was the most evil woman her cousin Ajita had heard of. She had brought untold disgrace to the family and permanently marred the future of any girl who would be born into the family including Ajita. Dadi Ma spewed out a train of venom filled adjectives whenever a servant or a visiting relative mentioned the name of Sundari either innocently or intentionally ; mostly later, to evict a response from Dadi Ma that would enliven their otherwise dull moments. Dadi Ma's wrinkled face would contract exposing the few deeply stained teeth which had survived her affair with tobacco and expletives of highest degree allowed to a woman in most adverse circumstances would follow in her shaky nasal voice. 

"Don't talk about that karamjali! kalmui! maatimili! that witch, that whore, that daughter of a whore......." there was no end. 

Not that she was often mentioned in the household. Sundari's existence had been so discreetly buried by her own father, grandparents, aunts and uncles that Ajita younger to her by sixteen years had for a long time believed Sundari to be dead. There was no particular moment and no particular person who had informed Ajita that her cousin, who she had assumed dead all this while was in fact alive. It was a knowledge that had reached her in bits and pieces and one day the pieces had fallen into place and a new light had descended upon ten year old Ajita. She had also gathered that Sundari was an epitome of her name; the extremely beautiful. But Ajita had never seen a photograph of Sundari in any of the two large, dog eared, tattered family albums that contained the pictures of even the most distant and most vile of relatives who had ever set foot in this house. Now no one had to tell Ajita that the blank pages in the albums with bits of paper stuck here and there, was where Sundari's photographs had once been. But they had been pulled away and burned with the rest of her belongings ten years ago, when 16 year old Sundari had crossed the threshold of this house in the most evil manner, the manner in which the clause of no return is intrinsic. 

So Sundari had never returned, and her memories were scrubbed clean from the house as well as from the hearts except that hearts can never be fully sanitized from the love of near and dear ones. 

And given this fault of human nature Kamlesh Bua who had been Sundari's Bua too, while training Ajita to make pooris in the kitchen last Sunday had put a loving hand on Ajita's head said, "Oh! how quickly you are picking up my lovely child. You are smart and intelligent. You are just like my Sundari". 

"Do not curse my daughter Kamlesh Didi" Ajita's mother had snapped at her 

"May no daughter of this house in generations till the last-day may turn out to be like Sundari!". And Ajita had noticed tears well up in Kamlesh Bua's eyes but they had not dared drop for it was a crime in this house to shed tears for Sundari. The good for nothing Vikram who lived with his battered wife and children five houses down from Ajita's. Vikram who had been Sundari's runaway companion all those years ago only to eventually abandon her and come back to marry and procreate. That in fact was beyond everyone's understanding as to what Sundari had seen in that man. In that man of all the men who would have happily laid their hearts at her feet. 

Every passing day Ajita found her self falling in the vortex called Sundari at once repelled and attracted by her; riding the waves of conflicting emotions of hate and love for the cousin who's face Ajita had never seen but to whom she felt an intense belonging. 

It was in this state of mind that Ajita spent the first two weeks of her summer vacations till three days ago when Ajita woke up to a household entirely different from the one in which she had dozed off the previous night and entirely different in fact from the one she had ever known since her birth. It was too happy a place to be her own home. Dadi Ma was not her usual cursing self but a cheerful, elated woman. Her uncle, Sundari's father whom Ajita had never seen smiling and who's melancholy Ajita rightly attributed to Sundari was excitedly talking over the phone laughing, smiling almost chocking with tears.:" Oh! how you have decided to surprise us! You know you might have killed me! How I am dying to see you and hold you. Oh what a fortunate man I am this day......." 

In the kitchen Ajita's mother and Bua were talking excitedly; almost nervously. 

" Don't know what his daughter and wife eat. Not our spicy stuff I am sure." Ajita's mother was almost out of breath. 

"It would have been so much better had he called at least two days in advance. No news for ten years and now he is coming at a few hours notice!! All these brothers are slightly deviated from centre I tell you!" that was rare of Ajita's mother and she could not help laughing. 

"None of my brothers are deviated from centre !!" Kamlesh Bua said feigning annoyance. 

Then she turned to Ajita " You know what my *gudia*?" She called her *gudia*, a doll when she was really happy about something. 

"What?" Ajita asked 

"Your Prem Chachaji is coming from Canaadaa. He will arrive by evening!!” 

"Canada" Ajita corrected her. 

"Umhmm! What ever......Here I am telling you that your chacha ji is coming and you are telling me how to say Canaadaa. Its your daughter who is deviated from center Neelam" Kamlesh Bua was happily irritated. 

"And his Canadian wife too?" Ajita asked 

"Yes she too. I am so glad that you study in English medium. You will be able translate to her whenever she doesn't understand a thing" 

"They haven't taught me the meaning of the 'nice' words that Daadi Ma speaks all the time. So I won't be able to convey what a *khambakht *and *manhoos *she is" 

The women burst into laughter. 

"Don't worry, your Dadi is going to be too happy to be saying all that. And now you come and help me to clean up the upstairs room." Kamlesh Bua said 

That was the best part for Ajita. Cleaning up an old room that had not been touched for almost a decade was nothing less than the excavation of Mohen jo Daro and Harappa. 

"Do you remember Prem Chacha ji? How can you remember? You were this small when he left for Canaadaa" Kamlesh Bua indicated Ajita's size with a gap between her thumb and index finger as they climbed up the staircase. Bua was disturbingly excited, Ajita concluded. 

They put the key in the old rusted lock and it obliged after some pestering. As they opened the door a storm of dust hit their nostrils making Ajita sneeze several times. The room was full of old furniture kept atop each other, covered in dust and cobwebs. 

"It will take a century to clean this room Buaa!" Ajita said 

"Oh! No it will be cleaned in a second!" 

“If you had to go to moon to meet your brother, you will probably reach there also in a second” Ajita sighed 

“Very funny” Kamlesh Bua said 

With Ajita's help Kamlesh Bua took out the lighter furniture and lined it in the corridor. There was a set of four dining table chairs. Kamlesh Bua told Ajita that it belonged to a time when Ajita's grandfather was posted in Mirzapur. No one ate on table so the table was given away to the neighbourhood ironing man who had been eternally thankful. The chairs were used for a long time till their cane bindings loosened and new chairs arrived in Ajita's mothers dowry. 

There were two jute *charpoys *with shaky legs that excited Ajita no end and she insisted that one of them be repaired and given to Ajita to sleep on. 

There was a huge sofa set, tattered and blackened at the armrest and Kamlesh Bua  had to call Aman and Preetam, to take it out. 

"This was a part of your mothers dowry you know." Kamlesh Bua said to the boys hoping to evict some form of response from boys who were used to treating their ageing unmarried Bua like another piece of furniture. The boys were least interested in the history of a dust filled sofa and found responding unnecessary. A shadow of disappointment came over Kamlesh Bua's  face and Ajita felt sorry for her. 

"I hope Chacha ji gets them nothing. These arrogant fools" Ajita said after they left. 

"Don't say that!They are your brothers. " Kamlesh Bua lovingly chided Ajita 

With all the furniture out the room looked spacious. Its huge windows let in light and air. The ceiling had a beautiful POP design. Ajita wondered why the room was not being used for living. 

“It had been her room” Kamlesh Bua said as if reading Ajita's thought. After she went away only your Prem Chachaji continued to come here to use the bathroom at night, because at the time he lived in the adjoining room which did not have an attached bathroom. But when he left for Canaadaa two months later we turned it into storage" 

There was a single rot iron cot in one corner. It was covered with an expensive looking mattress. 

"Aman and Preetam will bring the single bed from Dadi's room here and attach it to this one to make a double bed for Prem Chachaji  and his family. But let us first clean up the place."Kamlesh Bua said to Ajita 

Ajita ran downstairs and brought the long bamboo stick her Dadi Ma used to shoo away monkeys. They attached a broom to its end and used the tool to clean up the ceiling of cobwebs. Then came the turn of cupboards. They were empty except a dozen hangers and layers of dust. Sundari's clothes must have hung from these hangers once. Ajita's heart skipped a beat at that idea. They dusted the cupboard first and then washed it with water and detergent. They did the same with window sills, doors and fans. At the end of two hours the walls and windows were spike and span and the floor was a pool of mud. 

"Lets start with the floor Bua" Ajita said 

"Lets me get you something to eat first. In the meanwhile you dust this cot” 

Kamlesh Bua went downstairs and Ajita began dusting the cot starting from the header. Then she lifted the mattress from one side and placed it against the header and clean the base of the cot. The base was made up of vertical and horizontal strips of metal making tiny squares of space. 

A folded piece of paper lay there. Ajita picked it up. The pattern of the base was embossed on it almost chopping it into squares. Ajita unfolded it. 

The handwriting was beautiful: 

*He came to me last night for the umpteenth time and devoured me. I died once again for the umpteenth time only to be born again in the morning and live through the day wearing the façade of a happy and carefree girl. I told  Dadi Ma and she refused to believe me. I wish she had the courage to believe me. Yes even believing needs courage for once you believe you are compelled to take action which unfortunately none of you are capable of. I wish Ma were here. Things would have been so different if she were here.* 

*I can stay here no more. I have chosen to walk into the claws of a wolf for the child in my belly needs a paternal identity and it will in any case be much more bearable to be devastated by Vikram rather than be destroyed at the hands that were meant to nurture me. * 

*I am destined to bring upon my family grief and dishonour and by leaving quietly I am allowing you all a lesser dishonour than you deserve. * 

*Sundari * 

*4th November 1997* 

Ajita couldn't believe what was in her hands. A ten year old note written by Sundari, as she left the house to never come back. No one had ever found it. No one had ever removed the mattress. Who was 'he'? How did he 'devour' her? Ajita dropped to the cot, giddy and nervous. She read the note again and again till it made some sense. The moment it made sense, it became unbelievable and a wave of nausea overcame her. 

She heard footsteps ascending the staircase. She quickly folded the paper and tucked it in her pocket. Kamlesh appeared with a tray of food. At the sight of food threw up. 

"Hey bhagwaan! its my fault. I should have made my poor baby work so hard" Kamlesh Bua quickly put down the tray and gently patted Ajita's back. Then she gave her water to rinse her mouth and laid the mattress back on the cot. Ajita laid down, and closed her eyes feeling light headed. 

" Try to sleep my dear" Kamlesh Bua said as she began cleaning the floor. 

"Why did she go bua?" 

"Who?" 

"She who's name is forbidden in this house" 

"You already know. She went because she found that Vikram more appealing than her honor; than our honor!” 

"Where is she now" 

"We don't know" 

"Why did you not try to find out" 

"She is dead for us" 

*She had died several times before she died for you.* 

"Can I ever become dead too for you ?" 

"Will you dishonor us like her?" 

"I will probably not give you the privilege of any lesser dishonor than you deserve." 

"What do you mean? " Bua turned around. Her eyes looked as if they will pop out of their sockets. 

"Nothing Bua. You will not understand " 

Kamlesh Bua picked up the wiper and began drying the floor. She had to keep an eye on the girl now. She wondered if the room was occupied by some kind of spirit. 

“Stop reading those silly books” Kamlesh Bua said, now clearly bereft of her previous cheerfullness. 

As soon as her Bua went down to get the cot Ajita took out the note and read it again. 

'....destroyed by the hands that were meant to nurture me....." What on earth did that mean? She read the note again and again. The letters were beautifully drawn. Perfect curves, evenly spaced. But the lines sloped steeply downwards to the right. That was the hand of a hopeless person, tired of life full of dejection. Not that of a dreamy eyed girl about to elope with her lover to live happily forever. 

Kamlesh Bua's steps sounded again on the staircase. Ajita placed the paper back in her pocket. 

"Cot is broader than the door. it just won't come out. There is no time to dismantle it there and assemble it back again here." Kamlesh Bua was panting. 

"So what do we do know?" 

"Chachaji and family go into Dadi Ma's room. Dadi Ma and I go into your room with additional mattress on floor for me and you come up here. Your papa has decided that. OK!" 

"OK" Ajita said feebly. Sleeping in Sundari's room where she had died repeatedly was not a pleasing idea. 

"If you are feeling strong enough, go down and bring your stuff. There isn't much time left now. They will be here in a few hours." 

For three hours Ajita transported her books, clothes, and all the quaint possessions of a 10 year old making innumerable trips up and down the stairs. 

Then she took a bath and put on the pink dress that had been Dadi Ma's gift for her 10th birthday. It was along frock with ruby beads attached on the frills and delicate crochet lining the neckline. She combed her shoulder length hair and taking two bands of hair from either side of the parting she pinned them down at the back of her head with pretty tic tacks. 

"Ready my Barbie doll?" Ajita's mother looked adoringly at her. 

"I am feeling very tired ma. How I wish no one was coming!" She was drained physically and emotionally. Sundari's note was all that mattered in her life at the moment. 

"There are here! Just stay around for some time. Then go and rest in your room" 

Ajita followed her mother to welcome her Chachji and his family and was somewhat disappointed to discover that her Chachiji was no fair American as they had all imagined but an African American with a complexion darker then her own! It did not help her spirits either that her new cousin, 9 year old Janet with a terrible accent and foul mood was immediately placed under Ajita's care by Dadi Ma. 

But when her Chachaji after greeting all the adults turned to Ajita, all her exhaustion vanished and she stood there dwarfed by his size and enchanted by his deep, kind eyes, which were so much unlike her father and Bade Papa's. He placed his huge fatherly arms around Ajita's frail shoulders and exclaimed "How big has my little princess grown!! 

A wave of affection surged in Ajita's heart, and chocked her. He was after all her Chachaji. The beloved younger brother of her father. It had taken just one spark to ignite the affections that had lain dormant all this while. At that moment Ajita wanted to collapse in his arms. In less than sixty seconds of meeting him she wanted to cry like a baby and tell him that a great injustice had been meted out to Sundari Didi in this house. She knew not what it exactly was. Her Chachaji will surely understand. 

Aunt Amelia was a gentle woman who did not intimidate Ajita's Ma and Kamlesh Bua. Anyone with a complexion darker than them was not capable of intimidating them. Not even Robert Mugabe! 

Amelia had a soft voice and sad eyes. For some reason Ajita pitied her. 

For the rest of the evening Ajita followed her Chachaji like his tail and Chachaji reciprocated the attention with equal warmth. Later at night after dinner they opened their huge suitcases, and brought out the gifts they had brought for every member of the family. Aman and Preetam got a camera each and Ajita got a swank tablet. She didn't have enough words to thank them so she hugged her chachaji and he hugged her back. Rest of the elders including Dadi Ma got a mobile handset each. 

"How much money you have spent Prem!" Dadi Ma exclaimed rather concerned. 

" This is nothing Ma. Just a fraction of my income!" 

*What a marvelous man Chachaji was. Rich and kind and loving. What a fortunate girl Janet was!* 

At some hour late in the night while everyone was still talking animatedly and Ajita's Papa and Bade Papa were outdoing each other in terms of volume and excitement Ajita dozed off nesteled in her Chacaji's arms. She woke up next morning on the living room cot where her Chachji had placed her and covered her with a sheet. What a loving man he was. Ajita wished he were her father instead of her own father who never allowed Ajita physical intimacy and had never picked her up past the age of two. Janet having slept an entire night appeared more cheerful. The day passed decoding the new gadgets midst plates of pakoras and innumerable cups of tea, and Amelia trying to roll puris midst peals of laughter in the kitchen. By the evening Janet had taken a fancy for the *sari* and insisted upon trying every *sari* from Kamlesh Bua's wordrobe. A particular mauve coloured *sari* that Ajita had wrapped around her suited her extremely very well. 

“Look Janet! You are looking like an Indian doll in this one!” Ajita exclaimed “Come! Lets show you to your father Janet!” 

“No, let it be” 

“Oh! Why not? Come na! Come!” Ajita tried to pull Janet to the living room 

“No!” Janet stood adamant not to go to her father. 

So Ajita went and pulled her Chachaji into Kamlesh Bua's room take a look at the pretty Indian doll. 

“Isn't she looking beautiful Chachaji?” Ajita exclaimed 

“Very beautiful indeed!” Chachaji bent down to stoke his daughter's cheek. 

Janet jerked his away. Suddenly her mood became sour. She pulled away the sari and ran to her mother. 

*What a thankless little brat. Totally her mother's chipku. *Ajita felt sorry for her Chachaji who stood there smiling unlike her own father who would have undoubtedly spanked her had she ever behaved like that. 

By the time they went to bed that night the kitchen and the living room was a mess and bua's wardrobe was beyond recognition but no one seemed to mind anything that day. 

"If I had made that mess what would you have done to me Bua! You are so partial! " Ajita teased Kamlesh Bua as she went upstairs to her new room. Ajita was a happy child today except that Sundari's letter persistently gnawed at a corner of her mind. She made up her mind to show the note to Chachaji at the first opportunity she got to be alone with him. He was sure to understand. 

Ajita climbed into her new bed and quickly fell asleep. 

When she woke up again the house had become totally quiet. The only sounds to be heard were the occasional barking of dogs in the street below and the receding 'khat-khat' emitting from the stroke of nightwatchman stick as it hit the ground. Ajita's room was dark, except a dim light from the neighbor's balcony that had found its way in. Unexpectedly the door of her room creaked open and the bright light from the corridor bulb blinded Ajita. She shielded her eyes and looked harder. 

He was standing in the door way 

“Do you need anything” Ajita asked politely 

He walked in and sat at the edge of Ajita's cot. 

"Do you need anything ?" Ajita again asked. 

He stooped over Ajita and brought his face close to hers. His breath was reeking of alcohol. 

“You have......” Ajita began to say somethings but he clamped her mouth with his hand. The dogs had stopped barking and the watchman had moved far away. In the deathly quietness of the night Ajita heard her dress rip open. What followed next turned her world upside down. 

Her her body seemed to burst into a thousand pieces; her soul into a million. 

As her tiny frame wriggled under his weight, curtains began to lift one by one, exposing one ugly truth after other. He was who Sundari had run away from. The hands that had devoured and destroyed Sundari in this very room on this very cot had come back and destroyed Ajita. 

When he was done he got up and pulled on his trousers. Then he turned around and left. As Ajita lay there, shocked, agonized and traumatized, her heart writing pain she knew one thing for sure: She was neither Sundari nor Janet. She was Ajita and Chachaji was not going to get away this time. 


