From: Aarti V Raman <kingdomcomethebook@gmail.com>
Date: 18 February 2015 at 12:30
Subject: Submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com
Bio: I am from Mumbai and a Harlequin India and Leadstart Author with books out in the romantic thriller genre. My recent novel "Kingdom Come" is an Amazon Bestseller. I have also written short stories in an anthology for Rupa and for Mills and Boon. And I am currently going to be published by Fingerprint books. Short stories are a particular favorite form of expression because they require a level of cutting through fluff and getting to the heart of the matter in 50 words or less. 

*Kids know things. * 

*Adults think we don’t: that we are too young or too stupid or not smart enough or a million things that doesn’t make us as smart as you, Dad, you Mom. But we know things. We can understand too, even if we can’t assimilate or process or take action. * 

*We are silent witnesses too, aren’t we?* 

*Wasn’t I, Dad? * 

*Wasn’t I? * 

### 

He loved his earphones. They were his most treasured possession. The headphones were a pair he’d picked up one day on the way home from the nearby garbage collection site, where the good people from the nearby housing societies threw away all the stuff they didn’t want anymore. They had no use for the cool pair of shoes that he wore (yes, scuffed beyond redemption, but they are Lee COOPER!) and the comb he’d got for Aai, when he’d seen what had happened to the other one. What his dad had done with the other one. 

But man, those headphones were his everything. Other boys his age loved cricket bats and balls and played on their mobile phones and smoked locally rolled cigarettes that cost less than the vadapaav he hungered for some days, and yet he loved the headphones. 

They were orange. Bright, vivid, a slash of orange with orange wires and those sticky-in things that made sure the buds sat comfortably inside your eardrums. He could plug in Aai’s mobile phone and listen to FM all night long on it. 91.1 FM, 98.3, 93.5 (It’s HOT!) all the songs, the jockeys, the traffic update guys – these were his friends. He could get lost in this world. 

This was his escape from a world that smelled of old dal, unwashed clothes and a bed sheet that has holes in it from being used since he was born. 

The door to the *baarsaati *opens with a creak. He studiously turns the page to his notebook, even though his heart speeds up and his breath becomes a tad bit shallow and his hand is shaking as he turns the page again. His vision is hazed with red. 

Smack! 

“What is this good for nothing boy doing now? How is all this studying going to help him become a man?” 

Aai answers something. Softly, too softly for him to listen as he blinks his eyes clear of water and gets back to his book. His Math teacher will not understand why he didn’t finish his homework if he doesn’t turn it in tomorrow. Besides, the sooner he finishes his Math homework, the sooner he can have dinner and go to bed where he can pretend to sleep while he listens to FM radio all night long on Aai’s mobile phone with the orange earphones. 

He just thanks god every day that his dad hasn’t found them yet. 

Dad walks into the kitchen. There is a sound of glass tumbling down onto the floor, a small silence and Aai says something. Dad raises his voice then. 

“Send him out to play. That fucker landlord is coming in half an hour. You need to be ready for him. Kutrya.” 

“I am tired tonight,” Aai says. 

“I don’t care. Send him out to play and be ready. You know what to do. He needs to go away. I don’t have this month’s rent.” 

Aai doesn’t say anything and the house is silent with nothing more than the whir-whir drone of the ceiling fan. Usha ceiling fan. He knows because those were some of the first letters he’d ever read and identified in his life. 

U. 

S. 

H. 

A. 

Usha. 

It’s his Mom’s name too. 

Usha. Meaning Sunrise. Dawn. The herald of a new day. 

He hopes desperately that one day his mother won’t wake up and he can go to town on his father with the meat-slicer Aai uses to cut the occasional fish he brings home and be done with it all. He hopes even more desperately that he can grow up fast, fast, faster like they show in the films and then he can take Aai away from here so she will never have to… 

“What did you study today in class, boy?” Dad asks as he adjusts his lungi and looks at his offspring. 

He mumbles something at his dad. Better to answer than to be backhanded. 

Dad lurches away and sits himself down in front of the TV and switches it on, belches loudly as he unbuttons his shirt and exposes his hairy chest and starts to watch the cricket. The cricket-watching is followed by a steady stream of curses. But the cursing is fine. The cricket is a distraction. 

So long as the TV is on, the old man will forget his wife and his crappy job and his good for nothing scrawny son and that he hates the world and everything in it and wants them all dead and – 

“Rohan, dinner is ready.” 

He smiles involuntary at his mother’s halting English. He has been teaching her English when he does his homework so they can talk in private soon. But they do it out of dad’s earshot so he doesn’t get mad. 

“Yes, I need to be done with this homework before I eat, Aai. Give me five minutes.” 

Aai comes in and affectionately rubs a hand down his back, and he can feel her fingers, thin and scarred from scrubbing, sweeping, cleaning and cooking, washing clothes and holding him. Remembers when she had brushed his hair away from his face the night of his birthday. The way she’d haltingly sung *Happy Birthday to you, happy birthday to you, happy birthday maajha Rohan *and he’d pretended to roll his eyes and be embarrassed but he’d been so thrilled. 

Aai had the world’s best voice. Soft and lilting and sweet, like the promise of an unfulfilled dream. It had been such a nice birthday. One of his best. 

He quickly scribbles off long division answers and goes into the kitchen and gives her a hug, just because. 

Dad watches them with a jaundiced eye. Mother and son, a fucking picture of Madonna peace. Aai in her cheap cotton sari and her mangalsutra that you get for fifty bucks in the local train and her sindoor and bindi glinting vividly on her forehead. As vividly as the cut lip she sports, which is now an interesting purple color because he hadn’t been able to get back fast enough from Shah Aunty’s, she’d asked so many questions and he didn’t know what to tell her. 

Baba beats Aai. 

Aai fell down in the stairs. 

Baba beat Aai so badly because she’d made varan with the more expensive dal because it was my birthday. 

Aai banged her lip on the cupboard, Aunty. Her lip is bleeding. Can I please have some ice, jaldise? 

He screws his eyes shut as his breath becomes ragged again and quickly finishes the homework and carefully screws the top on his gel pen, afraid to see how much ink is left. If it’s too little he’ll have to ask her for another pen and he didn’t want to do that. Maybe tomorrow he could ask Avi for a spare pen. Avi was his *yaar*. Avi would give. 

The books are put away and he has dinner, hot roti and cold dal and a mother’s smile that burns like lava in his young heart. The eyes that stare at him are his own. He sees them while brushing his teeth in the chipped mirror of the common toilet in their chawl. 

Aai’s eyes. 

Brown, liquid, depthless. 

He remembers the time her right eyelid was swollen shut because Baba had shoved her into the cupboard because she’d forgotten to iron his shirt. She’d been unable to open it for two days. 

He wants to *kill *someone. 

The food tastes like ashes in his mouth, sits like cement in his stomach and he pushes his plate away and smiles at her and washes his mouth and hands like Aaji had taught him years ago, a fantasy ago, and runs out to play with his friends. Runs out before Dad can catch him and get him to run errands to the men who smell bad and always push him around. Runs out before the landlord who constantly chews paan and has oiled hair comes in and smiles odiously at him, as he sizes his mother up and down as if she were nothing more than a piece of meat he wants to devour. 

Runs out before he can think about the awful thing that is probably happening in his home right fucking now. 

Playtime is in the chawl’s courtyard. The square in the middle full of potholes and dogshit on the side and the day’s wash that is hanging from ropes everywhere. The flickering streetlight has been used as a basketball hoop, as one end of a lawn tennis net and a makeshift middle stump. 

His childhood could be defined here by these few square feet of concrete and asphalt. 

“Eh! Out ho gaya!” His friends hiss at him and he shakes off his dejection, passes off the precious willow to the next batsman and gives up his dream of achieving glory like Sachin again. No, wait. It’s Virat Kohli! He the man! Always will be. 

World Cup jitaya yaar, last time! 

But very soon, too soon, his time is over and he has to go back home. Dragging his feet, he walks in and watches Dad still in front of the TV, hand holding the plate of food hovering in mid-air while his mouth chews and chews like a masticating cow and he wishes he knew how to punch someone so hard that his mouth would never move again. He’d seen Bruce Lee do it in a movie. 

It could be done. 

TV plays on while the chawl settles, lights are dimmed, the chataai is passed on the floor while Dad takes the diwan that doubles up as a couch when guests come. Aai holds him close, checks his breath for the minty smell of toothpaste and tickles his nose and smiles at him and his heart hurts. *Aai, I love you,* he wants to say. He can’t; the words stuck somewhere in his oesophagus. But he fetches the ice, the bandaid, the doctor. Whatever she needs. 

Whatever she needs… 

He stealthily plugs in the earphones while the TV drones on, some news channel is talking about yet another election being fought somewhere...oh god, oh god, no more elections now…dad had been brutal when they’d lost the last time and… 

He screws his eyes shut tightly and tunes in the radio and listens to Anurag tuning in for the night show. His voice calm, soothing. 

He has almost drifted off to sleep when he hears the first hushed whisper. 

“Get up. Come up.” 

“I can’t. I hurt.” 

“Come up now.” 

His eyes spring open underneath the blanket. Aai moves up, silently without rustling the coir mattress that had been a gift from her parents for their wedding night. His hands curl into little fists, puny, useless as he clutches the mobile phone so hard he can feel the plastic stick onto his fingers. His heart stops beating as he stops breathing because he hates what comes next. 

The soft rustle-rustle of Aai’s sari being shifted, lifted, the diwan creaking as Dad settles on top of her and then… 

His breath gushes out as the first smack sounds. 

*I didn’t like the bhaaji today. Make it with less salt tomorrow.* 

*Yes*, Aai answers. 

*Did he agree to delay the rent for another month? * 

*Yes, he did. * 

*I wish you weren’t so beautiful. * 

*I’m sorry. * 

Another smack and a long drawn out sucking sound that he can hear despite the music playing so calmly, so serenely in his head. His head is hurting in agony, in sheer unbearable agony as he clenches his toes together and the diwan begins to move, creak-creak-creak… 

*Can you go slower? You’ll wake him up.* 

Another smack. 

Shut up or I’ll shut your mouth for you and you don’t like it. 

*Sorry. Sorry.* 

A tear squeezes out of his eye and runs into the faded pillow he’s laid his head on ever since he was a young boy and he listens, listens to the music, to the sound of the diwan moving and his mother’s muffled cries of distress and despair that she tries to control. 

*Take more, bitch. I want a better son this time than the runt you produced last time. * 

Aai cries out. 

His eyes are screwed shut so tight, he feels blind. It’s better to be blind, to be deaf and mute and to not exist than to have to go through this every night, every night...please Kill him, please have a bus kill him as he walks to work, please god let Salman Khan be drunk tonight as he comes down Pali Hill and… 

Dad grunts. Once. Twice. There is the sound of some material tearing and Aai cries out again. Really loudly. 

*I’ll do this again tomorrow. You like it, na? * 

Aai doesn’t answer. There is just one soft, heart-wrenching sob from her. 

He lies perfectly still as he hears footsteps pass by him, under the blanket. Heavy treads that echo like an elephant’s stomping followed by the heavy painful dragging of someone who can barely move. He catches the edge of Aai’s sari hem as it brushes against his forehead. 

Ten minutes later, she comes back to lie down next to him, gathers him in her bony arms and sings tunelessly to herself. She keeps the secret of the earphones as much as he does. 

Pretence is all they have to show for love. 

The next morning when he wakes up, she has a smile for him and a hug that she can’t give properly because her belly is rounded and tight like a protruding football that he touches often and with great joy, especially when he is kicking, like Bhaichung Bhutia. He wants a little brother too. God, no sister. No woman. Not to his Dad. 

No no. 

He gives his mother as tight a hug as he possibly can and goes with her to the washroom, carrying the mug and bucket while she carries the little plastic holder that has his Chhota Bheem toothbrush (Dad had not liked that) and minty toothpaste and plain stainless steel tongue cleaner. Aai is chattering about nothing consequential, nothing important, when he glances up and catches a flash of white on her chest. 

“What happened to your blouse, Aai?” he asks as the piece of purple fabric flaps in the wind, now that he can make it out. 

Aai transfers the cup to her other hand while she covers her shoulders with her pallu and smiles at him. 

“Nothing, Rohan. You brush your teeth properly now. Or they will fall out when you eat chocolate.” 

He smiles, because she needs him to. And remembers the sound of fabric tearing. 

“What is for dabba today, Aai?” 

“Poha. With potatoes. Your fevrit.” 

“No, Aai. It’s pronounced, feh-va-ret. Favorite.” 

Aai smiles with such pride at him in the chipped mirror, the flapping fabric hidden under the cheap polyester of her sari. The bright false gold of her mangalsutra blinding under the eighty-kilowatt bulb. Then she whispers, “Rohan is my favorite.” 

He smiles and nods and spits the paste froth out along with his unshed tears and the congealed mess of his emotions. 

He goes to school, waving goodbye to Aai, Dad still snoring like the dead on the diwan and wishes, wishes to all the gods his mother makes him pray to that one day, one day he will grow up and be nothing like the man who’d given birth to him. 

Nothing at all. 

