From: Radhika Prasad <radhikadasarp@gmail.com>
Date: 5 July 2015 at 16:31
Subject: Submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com
Bio: Radhika Prasad works as an Assistant Professor of English Literature whenever "the system" allows her to. When it does not, she spends her time alternately writing, trying to write and telling herself to keep writing. Interests include persisting through difficult books and movies. 

Again. 

The jamun tree on the side of the road swayed in the crisp winter breeze. Raji sat in the passenger seat of the immobile car and watched the sun, whose rays extended and retracted with every stir of the leaves. As she observed a squirrel run back and forth down the same branch in a meaningless frenzy, her father walked back from the grocery shop. Every now and then when her father took her for her check-ups at the hospital, she was brought past this ramshackle conglomeration of shops that called itself a market. It was this market and the rubbish dump next to it that six months back Raji had walked every inch of in the lit parts of three days, calling and whistling for big, golden Marty, hoping desperately that he may be already accustomed to her voice and her whistles, that maybe he had inherited from his mother the immediate connection between food and that shrill sound, so much so that reacting to it had become muscle memory for her. Lila had died in childbirth. Raji had been certain, as if in compliance with some step-motherly instinct, that Marty was still alive. But he had not come back to her. It was not that Marty wasn’t smart enough to find his way back once he had wandered, she thought as the ignition warmed. He was only too restless. 

The car pulled onto the narrow lane before Raji’s house. Her father inched the car forward and backward, edging into the cramped parking space. As the reverse alarm set off, Raji stuck her head out of her window looking left and right for Marty’s siblings who had survived the expulsion by the welfare authorities in which he had gotten away. There was a certain sense of parental care she had begun to feel towards them ever since she fought the authorities. She was mostly dismissive of this feeling, yet it came upon her with regularity, accompanied by the fear of what may have happened to Marty, and how long the hostility against the other siblings would allow them to survive. 

She was used to Kalo and Tuffy materializing out of nowhere at the sound of the car. But the sun was brilliant and she would not have been surprised to find them in a deep slumber on the grass, their coats warmed and flanks rising and falling evenly. She walked around the car to the other side and noticed Kalo standing quite still, attentively chewing on a plant on the far end of the park, twisting her head sideways to exercise all her teeth on it. Kalo resembled a Doberman, only shorter, healthier, and possessing a long, white tipped tail that now just about twitched reluctantly at the sight of Raji, who was calling out to her. Displaying some irreverence with seemingly great effort, Kalo continued to focus on the plant, and made eye contact only to acknowledge her friend’s presence as minimally as possible. This was strange behavior – normally, her enthusiasm at seeing Raji was almost violent: she would leap up on her, often scratching her with her thick toenails, or affectionately practicing her canines on Raji’s hand. Raji minded this in the least. As she walked up to the bitch, the latter remained rooted but her tail twitched again, as if of its own accord. When she stubbornly refused to show any more emotion, Raji recalled how she had slapped her that morning to stop her from bullying Tuffy, the meekest of the pack. Clearly, Kalo had decided to feel offended. There was nothing to be done. Now, bored of the plant, Kalo sullenly slumped away. Raji turned around, allowing the animal her moods, and climbed up the two floors to her house. 

*** 

She was greeted in the doorway by the smell of rajnigandha flowers that her mother had procured quietly from a funeral. A few stalks of brilliant blue orchids that now stood in a pale ceramic vase had similarly been salvaged from the doorstep of their first-floor neighbors whose son had recently been married, and who, amidst the imaginable profusion of bouquets and sweets had left some of the former untouched next to the garbage, and passed on many boxes of the latter to glad servants. Reaching her room, Raji hung her bag on the chair and looked around. It was a mess, yet again. It was beginning to seem as if things flew out of their assigned places of their own accord: as if the salwar preferred being draped on the back of the chair rather than remaining neatly folded inside the wardrobe, the pencil preferred lying prone at the centre of the table rather than standing upright in the pen stand. In fact, she distinctly remembered having opened the overflowing study table drawer to keep the last few ATM receipts inside. The drawer had refused to go in beyond a certain point, and she had had to remove it from its channels in order to extract a crumpled piece of cloth from the back. Then she had kept everything back inside. The grease from the channels was still on her hands. But here was the entire stapled bunch of receipts again, perched at the edge of the table. A dull, slow frustration welled up within her. The sight of the room made her sluggish. For a reason she could not grasp at the moment, she was suddenly reminded of her mother on weekends, quiet, frowning, tired. Barely conscious of it, she squeezed her eyes shut and then blinked rapidly as if to look clearly, just like her mother. 

The room had been comforting after 26 days at the hospital. Raji had craved the sight of her bed, the side lamp, the study table – all home to her rest, her sleep and her thoughts; but it didn’t feel the same anymore. A certain claustrophobia which only manifested itself when she slept and dreamt harangued her, and the best she could do was sleep with her head on the other end of the bed. Even so when her eyes opened in the middle of the night still, cloying dreams hung in the dark. Distractedly, she began sorting some freshly ironed clothes. In the past her mother would frequently mix up their clothes and amidst her own shirts she would find waiting for her several of her mother’s somber kurtas and sari-blouses. But now the pile was small and quite free of any extras. As she placed the clothes inside the wardrobe, she thought of the many occasions on which she had discussed her dreams with her mother. She was certain she needed a change of place – it was after all not an analysis of her unconscious but a real feeling. But her worries about the dreams notwithstanding, her mother always made sure to be the voice of reason. It was simply an impractical idea. It was much easier for Raji to be careful of her health here. Moreover, if she were to live anywhere else, all her attention would be taken up by household worries which were well taken care of here. Most of all, it didn’t seem safe at all – who would she live with, and where? How would she travel back home, every time she had to? Would she really be able to travel alone? How would she understand a new place all on her own, without any help? She had never done it before. And what if something happened? It was best to avoid all unpleasant incidences in every way possible. Her mother’s very sensible arguments, however, tended to leave Raji feeling utterly helpless. At the end of these discussions she would have nothing to say in defense of her wish to leave except that she simply wanted to, and could not sleep here anymore. It was not the best argument according to her, and wouldn’t have been according to her mother either, so she would choose to remain quiet. To Raji, her mother had for the larger part of her life known little more than domesticity, besides a job which took up only a portion of her day. It seemed that she had little else to bequeath to her. 

*** 

The bell rang when the clock showed ten minutes past two. Raji knew it was her mother. She heard her father open the door. Her mother was always exhausted and irritable on returning from the school. Raji watched as she quietly went about washing up and then, with one end of the sari pallu tucked at her waist, made lunch. Raji had tried insisting that she take charge of meals, as she had earlier, but ever since the illness her mother insisted on taking on a number of burdens which though they had been necessary at some point in the recent past, were no longer so. Paradoxically, the more Raji tried to run away from the idea of being in “recovery”, the greater importance it held for her mother. Even now, two months after the treatment was over, she slept in Raji’s room in case her daughter wake up in pain in the middle of the night. 

As she listened to her mother’s soft footsteps enter her father’s room to hand him his plate of food, she listened also to the silence that transpired between her parents. The increasing distance between them oppressed her. She particularly resented being the cause – or rather the excuse – for them not having the time to face each other. They now slept in different rooms – her mother in Raji’s room, and her father in the guest room, where he spent most of his time in the day. Their own room was bereft of sleep. 

At 21, when Raji’s mother had chosen to train as a kindergarten teacher her father and older brother along with everyone who heard of this had approved of the choice. A teaching job was good for women, her aunts told her. She would be back in time to take care of the home, and also have the satisfaction of being a ‘working woman’ – the epitome of balance who with the four arms of a goddess handled a pen, a frying pan, a lipstick and an infant all at the same time. Moreover, it would train her to take care of children. Their presumptuousness irked her. She wanted to tell them all that thoughts of marriage and children weren’t all that went about in her mind, that in fact they were particularly far from her mind, even if to their dismay, and that there were actually decisions that were taken independently of all that. She liked children, found them fascinating and was good with them; she liked the idea of sharing knowledge, even the most basic yet most important knowledge. But as advised by better sense, she would just smile and nod. 

Soon, with the aid of newspaper matrimonials and quite irrespective of how often the thought of it occurred to her as she taught four-year-olds the conjunction between the standing and the sleeping line in an “L”, Raji’s mother was married. He was a pleasant if quiet man who had a surprising penchant for playing master of ceremonies which one could have expected to ill-befit a man with more honest smiles than chatter, but which he nonetheless pulled off with ease. Being young, she could not help but adore him for being admired by those around. But she also loved him because he spoke well to her, always, unlike her own father, who rarely had qualms in chastising his wife in public for being ill-informed, for not being enough like his mother, for not knowing how to serve the guests alongside a host of other reasons. In the initial years, eager to please, Raji’s mother lovingly played along with the parties that he nonchalantly brought together, becoming the quiet mistress of his ceremonies, even learning to cook and clean, skills she had scoffed at before she married, having haughtily but playfully declared that it would be her husband who would cook for her. From a workday, she would return in the afternoon not so much to her home as to her house and kitchen, and in a few hours welcome guests to a bright, well aired living room, lights reflecting off spotless tables, fresh flowers in vases and the balcony cooled and hemmed in with green all around. At the end, he would help her clean up, the two of them working quietly in the satisfying silence that settled after everyone had left. She would gather the dishes and wash the expensive crockery that was not to be trusted in the hands of the help, and he would brush the crumbs off the sofa sets and wipe the wet crockery clean. At the end of these evenings she was too exhausted for words, but these quiet hours of contentment were her reward. 

During her pregnancy, visitors were few and expectant of no more than a cup of tea. As hard as handling a pregnancy and soon an infant was, she could not help but notice the sense of relief she experienced at this pause in entertaining. It had been a long time since she could take the liberty of lying down in bed after returning from school and feeling herself fall into a kind of comfort that is experienced only in afternoon slumber. Turning in bed with her swollen belly and tucking a cushion between her legs, she would listen to the silence that she had become so accustomed to hearing only at night, at which time it was punctuated by the deep breaths of her husband. Till the time he came home, she would savor this peace. Walking heavily after her nap, bare footed even in the winter, she would occasionally straighten cushions and table cloths, and then as it grew dark, without turning on a single light, she would settle down with a small cup of milky tea to watch the squares of twilight on her walls turning into night, slowly rubbing her belly as if to comfort the unborn Raji. 

The maternity leave lasted four months after Raji’s birth. She was an easy child – laughed much, and changed hands without a fuss. As she grew older and marginally easier to handle with the help of a nanny, barely a year after her birth, the quiet of the house began to be infused again with small talk and the steady, polite chatter of visitors. Accepting it now more as a whim of her husband rather than seeing it as the part of his nature that she had initially fallen in love with, Raji’s mother obliged, though she could not help but feel surprised at how easily she could now be kind to her guests without much caring for them, or smile without meaning it. She continued to straighten tablecloths and match cushion covers to curtains, to instruct the gardener and refill the vases, but by meaningless, empty force of habit. There were servants to help with the work and a good young woman to take care of Raji, but when the child cried with a feigned stomach ache during a party, she was forced to continue serving the guests over attending to her. She wondered if she had finally turned into the many-armed goddess that the TV commercials wanted her always to be. 

Over the years, with age, her body changed and it became harder to cope with the rush of school days and her husband’s social obligations. As Raji grew into a quiet school-goer with good grades, the parties continued but her mother’s job came to take more and more out of her. The school had become an odd institution, severely authoritarian and dryly corporate at the same time. Now, it had been more than two decades since she became a nursery teacher. She had been a loved one, remembered even by her first students. But Raji knew her heart broke at the fact that there was no more time to listen to the young children’s nonsensical reveries or to ensure they emptied their lunchboxes, to know them enough to miss and be missed during vacations. 

As a teenager Raji had watched her mother attempt to discuss these problems with her father – the increasing pressure at work, the politics, the complications, all of which made it harder for her to manage the social life that they (she was kind enough not to say *he*) desired to have. She would sit in his work room somewhat helplessly, her palms turned up, explaining how difficult and unpleasant work had become. He, staring with rapt attention at his computer screen, would nod sympathetically but have little to say or do. Occasionally, when he decided to respond, it was only to tell her to leave the job if it was quite as hard as that. 

Over time, as relatives moved to different cities, young people got married and old ones died, the parties dwindled. But as the chatter of guests died down, the silence between her parents seemed to grow and louder and louder for Raji. In the absence of new ones, when she tried to recall their old conversations, it seemed to her as if they only ever spoke to each other of the parties. Now there seemed to be nothing to talk about. The plants dried up, and vases, inhabited now by wintry stalks, were encircled at their bases by the darkened, shrunken remnants of carnations and chrysanthemums. 

*** 

At six, the bell roused Raji from her sleep. Like her mother’s return in the afternoon, the arrival of the help heralded the evening so regularly that without it things felt askew, as if the second part of the day was spilling into the third without any permission, even though the sky was a distinctly darker color. She rubbed her eyes and made as if to raise herself from the bed but before she could react, heard her mother’s bare footsteps on the cold floor moving towards the door. As she turned lazily in bed, she was mildly surprised for a moment by the soft, fluid warmth at her feet. It took her a moment to recognize the discreetly slipped hot water bottle. Now her mother was tiptoeing into the room, but relaxed on realizing that Raji was awake. Refreshed after her afternoon sleep, she was more cheerful. Folding her covers, she asked Raji if she would like some milk. I’ll have it in a while, Raji replied, her wakefulness still setting in. A string of instructions followed. If you have the milk now then you can have the soup well before dinner. I made plenty yesterday and froze it. Let me know whenever you want to have it, and also what you feel like having for dinner. I’ll be going to the market after my walk to bring your medicines: the chemist shop’s delivery boy has fallen ill. Do you need anything else? Raji sat quietly. She could not help but notice that in the past few months her mother had become more active. At the same time she was aware that she had become quieter in her mother’s presence, having to constantly subdue her irritation and being able only to replace it with politeness stripped of warmth. No, nothing else, she replied simply, deliberately making eye contact lest her mother misunderstand – or rather understand – that something lay behind the monosyllabic replies. 

It had been many years now since all those changes, since Raji’s mother arrived at the age when people finally are taught by their existences that there is a small absence that simply has to be lived through, from one day to the next. In the afternoons, though Raji tried not to, she could still see the vacancy in her mother’s eyes. A year back, however, from the time that Raji fell ill, her mother threw herself into taking care of her, finding renewed purpose in ensuring Raji’s recovery. Raji did recover: her youthful body was quick to shed its pains and solitude. But the purpose, as she saw, continued to be worked at even up till months later. 

She considered asking her mother to move into her own room. As she struggled with her thoughts, her mother said, I’m going for a walk now, but I’ll be back in exactly fifteen minutes. I know your father isn’t here, but will you be alright? It won’t be a problem will it? No, of course not, Raji replied. Do you have your phone with you? she asked. I hope it’s charged. Call me if you need anything from the market. I’m in the park right here. Raji kept quiet. She had been advising her mother to start taking evening walks for a long time. The doctor had prescribed it in all seriousness. With her increased interest in Raji’s health, she had somehow only now found in herself the stamina to begin these walks. The question that hovered in Raji’s mind was accompanied by a sharp awareness of the change her illness had brought about in her mother. Desirous of her independence though she was, Raji was wary of depriving her mother of this obvious purposefulness. In a strange way, the equation of dependence had been perfectly inverted now that Raji no more needed to be taken care of. 

As she shut the door behind the help, Raji realized that evening had already begun to turn into night outside. The clock showed half past six. She walked around in the dark, empty house from one window to the next. Now that the sun had set and it had grown colder, there were no children in the park. She savored the silence for a short while, sat on a chair and looked out a window at the twilight. Suddenly she was reminded of Kalo. She quickly walked to the kitchen. She had almost forgotten that it was time to feed the dogs. The routine had been broken when she had fallen ill, and now she was assailed by guilt for not having taken it up again every time she saw them. Desperate to start now, she searched for any stale bread that she could soak in warm milk, but soon realized there was none. For a moment she stopped and stared at the darkened sky again through the kitchen window. Then she went into her room and put on her shoes. As she tied the laces, she thought of the cold evening air. She had missed the changes in the weather for months, and now yearned to feel the icy wind on her face and to watch her breath fog up under the streetlights. She locked the door and began walking briskly to the market, hoping she would not encounter her mother. At the grocery shop, she bought a whole loaf of bread and some jaggery to keep the dogs warm. Walking back, her eyes scanned the road and the nearby staircases for them. She caught sight of Kalo at the staircase to her own house. The bitch stood between two cars, alert, tall and erect as always. It amused Raji to see her looking carefully, expectantly, at nothing in particular. Waiting, ironically, for something unexpected to happen. She watched her for a minute, suppressing her laughter, and then gave a short, sharp whistle. Kalo’s ears rose with a sudden frown, and then, her sight landing upon a familiar face, relaxed as her tale began to wag, starting slow, and then faster. A moment later she broke into a gallop, eager to reach Raji faster than herself. Raji laughed. Kalo heaved herself on her hind legs and tried to reach her face. To keep yet another jacket from being soiled, Raji playfully hopped and skipped away from the bitch, who continued to jump and zigzag from side-to-side, trying hard to understand the game. Soon feeling uncertain and upset for not being allowed to love, Kalo let out a long, complaining whine. Raji gave up. Walking over to her, she patted her on her head and rubbed her snout with her knuckles. Kalo, mellowed after the game, stood still and gently turned her head in Raji’s hand. Raji felt forgiven. 

--- 