From: medha nayak <leomedha31@gmail.com>
Date: 20 July 2015 at 23:12
Subject: Submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com
Bio:  I belong to a small coastal district of Balasore in northern Odisha. I pursued a Bachelor’s degree in English literature followed by a Masters degree in Sociology from Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi. I love to be close to the nature and paint its elements. I love to pen down my experiences with nature in my leisure. I am also engaged in research activities pertaining to human-animal conflict in my hometown. And I intend to spread the message of not forgetting our roots, our mother nature that needs our conscious attention and care now. 


*TWISTS AND TURNS TO NAINITAL* 

*Not exactly a love story yet full of emotions and contradictions. A travelogue stolen from youthful Amber’s diary.. * 

Yesterday’s tears had turned to smiles today. The excitement and apprehensions of the journey with my husband was deeply flowing through my veins. Quite early in the morning, even before the birds woke up, a cab was taking us to Anand Vihar rail terminus which was quite far from South Delhi. Tickets were ready, hotel was booked, leave from office was granted and we were just waiting to embark on the much awaited vacation. But for the last few days I had been signaling my friends about my fears and dilemmas around this trip which would perhaps decide the course of my life further. This would perhaps be my last journey with him or this will be followed by plenty of them. 

Nothing seemed to be favouring this trip. We tried to reconsider this trip in every possible way but had to take it while I and my husband were on the verge of being separated. In clear words we were considering a divorce to set ourselves free. My name’s Amber, 28, tall, pretty looking, quite successful at my own start-up company. And my husband, Arjun, in his thirties, ordinary looking but his brain works at an extraordinary speed and works for an IT firm. He pretends to have solutions to all problems. We met in 2010 as delegates to a conference and were head over heels in love. Within two years of seeing each other our parents sanctioned our deep love in wedlock. It has been two years since we took vows of togetherness and now we are at terrible crossroads! My parents still seemed to like him knowing well our issues of contention. Their traditional mindset around a marriage believed more in a compromise. Undoubtedly the girl is expected to compromise in most cases. In the cab, I was looking at the passing bridges, buildings, stadiums probably everything else except him, sometimes there were deep desire to jump off the car and end it right there. I was quite sure his mind must be suggesting him the same. The journey seemed to be taking too long as our desperation to get out of the car was increasing, but I realized the driver’s silly detour had taken us away from the station route. We immediately plugged into our GPS and collectively guided ourselves to the train before it departed from the station without us. 

I pretended to fall asleep in the train to avoid any conversation. We had the compulsion to sit next to each other through this five hour train journey and what could be better than falling asleep or at least pretending to! Closing my eyes I recalled how he had planned it all for me because I desperately needed a vacation from my work to walk over mountains, trek through the forest trails looking for birds or simply lie down by the turquoise waters by the beaches celebrating life. It was also the time when our arguments were picking up and a vacation seemed to mend those inconveniences. I suddenly had a deep urge to speak to him but all I could do was blabber about my friends and new assignments that I loved which he disliked for he didn’t approve of my new associates related to it. He held my new associations the reason for our tussle. It was intensifying with each passing day. There was mostly jealousy and meanness underneath that he was not ready to relent. 

Thankfully breaking my silly talks we were handed with a newspaper to chose from and update ourselves with the happenings around the world. I read the paper carefully like every day and closed it at the start of sports page. I didn’t realize he was peeping into the paper to find some interesting updates from his favourite section, the sports. He gave me a disgusted look, I quietly handed him the paper and I resumed my sleep drama. Being it a Satabdi express, we were offered with welcome drink (Fresca, lime juice) with biscuits, followed by some really sumptuous breakfast. Now we had a new topic to strike a better conversation, food. The food was better than any other train we travelled in with Indian railways; there was a scoop of *upma*, two *vada* with chutney, some fries and fresh fruits. Having our stomachs filled we carelessly threw our limbs on each other and dozed off. 

I woke up to see the terrains had changed; over the horizon mountains hiding behind clouds were visible and beneath was a streamlazily crawlingover the white dazzling sand. I could recall about the “the sands of time”, the big stones withered by time, travel and seasons and finally had taken tiniest shapes which were lying here called the sands. The train chugged in to our arrival station, Kathgodam. The station was too small with structures retained from the British times, some have BNR(Burma-Nagpur-Railway) signatures. 

Once out of the station, we looked around and soon pulled out our jackets to support our sweaters.Right in front of the station stood dark green mountain ranges welcoming us and we shared an Innova car to drive us to our dream destination, Nainital. Mountains were carved out to make motor-able roads. It was a 20 km drive uphill, moving close to the mountain with view of other mountain ranges on the other side, the valleys were getting deeper, scarier in fact, and the vegetation was changing into coniferous, evergreen, alpines from deciduous. The mountains were robed in numerous trees, shrubs, herbs and tiny wild flowers. Sometimes we could see monkeys swinging on the road side trees. Full of flora and fauna these hills seldom lose its greenery. Our ears were closing and opening with the change in air pressure at that height, head was reeling accompanied with dizziness and I wanted to throw up. My smart husband made me drink lime water that he had carried back with him from the train which soothed me until we reached. He could take care if he wanted to but most often he showed indifference at least at home. In the car the other passengers was a couple with their super-cute baby girl. Until we reached that man was busy on calls one after the other, he had least interest in the scenic beauty that we travelled through and was there for the heck of a family trip I guess. I wanted to simply throw away his phone and tell him to stop bothering his family and fellow passengers with such loud phone calls. Arjun could well understand my irritation and tried to his best to divert my attention. With those beautiful views in my eyes we were dropped at Nainital bus stop overlooking Naini lake. 

With few days to Diwali, the festival of lights, kids were bursting crackers by the road side. And suddenly we appeared before Naini lake with colourful boats and through the misty roads we accommodated ourselves in a hotel, pre-booked in the mall road. As soon as we got into our lake facing room I hugged him in excitement. He reciprocated. I felt awkward on regaining my consciousness. I quietly placed myself on the armchair in the balcony while he went in for a shower. Clouds were drifting in front of our room and sometimes dense clouds were blurring my visibility. It was all adding to the romance blossoming once again. The room was though small but enough to make us feel cozy. Though this wasn’t a home-stay but was run by a family staying on the ground floor. We had some good lunch in the room and slipped under our cozy blankets and soon fell asleep. 

I kept sleeping while Arjun was curious to explore the place. It was already evening and he was trying to wake me up. Getting fed up he tore open our room curtains. The view from the window left us awestruck! The beauty of the lake and shimmering yellow/red lights dotting the hills with its reflections on the water, I can’t describe in words. The lights were of the houses on the hills surrounding the lake. It was heavenly! Praising them, clicking pictures and buying small take-home tokens, we strolled on the mall road till Nani temple. It is a good place to buy woolen clothes and is famous for its hand-made designer candles. We had some good Chinese meal at Embassy restaurant which they said to be there from the British times, in fact most hotels there datesback their existence to the colonial days. I was almost panting on our way back to our room, road was little elevated. I could realize my sedentary job was responsible for my reduced stamina and our on-going arguments had reduced my mental strengths. With each step up I gasped for breathe and Arjun had to drag me to our room like a sack full of potatoes. Tired and seeking to hold on to something forgetting all past acrimonies made me hug him tighter this time and fell off to sleep in his arms. 

Arjun woke up early in the morning and found me lost in my dreams but still intact in his arms. He implanted some kisses on my forehead, swiftly kissed all over my face and broke my slumber. Angrily I threw him away being very annoyed at his advances. His love was mostly restricted to the periphery of our bed. We argued for quite some time and slept turning our backs to each other. Surprisingly we woke up fresh, geared up for the long day. Arjun brought out our sightseeing itinerary and with a guide we set sail for the day. 

Nainital lies between Shivalik and middle ranges of Himalayas. So surrounded by mountain ranges we began with the famous Nainital zoo, named “Bharat Ratna Pt.G.B.Pant High Altitude Zoo”. We had seen many of its promotion sign boards by Times of India on the mall road the other day. Our hotel people said it contained the captured man-eater leopards and tigers of Kumaon. I was curious if they were those ‘man-eating leopards of Rudraprayag’ that Jim Corbett mentions. 

It was again a good walk uphill which was holding me back but on the roads the boards indicating a Blood Pheasant in the zoo and the tigers promising their star appearances kept me going. Arjun was climbing up with ease. He was constantly ignoring my complaints and was asking me to narrate more on the birds that we could expect to see that day. Pursuing my passion for birds I was taking a basic ornithology course back at home. We reached early before the ticket counter opened. I narrated Arjun the stories of Jim Corbett highlighting on his encounters with tigers, leopards, and of his house in Nainital where he lived with his sister which is a museum now. On the zoo map it indicated the presence of myriad fauna but once I went in, I realized we had to walk a lot and I wasn’t keen about it in spite of my love for wildlife. The information brochure informed us that the zoo was spread over 4.592 hectares and its elevation is 2100 MSL. First in the row were the elegantly dressed pheasants in resplendent colours. It seemed as if some big designer from ‘fashion TV’ had designed them and they were all certainly ready for a great photo shoot day carrying their super-model like attitude. There were Lineated Khalij pheasant, Cheer pheasant, Lady Amherst’s, Silver pheasant to name a few. We simply couldn’t take our eyes off them and sometimes we even revisited their cabinets. We saw just one leopard who was least interested to entertain his visitors. Why would he entertain us? We are freely roaming around while the leopard in captivity has restricted freedom.We saved our energy for visiting other places and ended our zoo tour soon. Next place was not on our list it was guide’s choice, a temple called ‘Hanumangrahi’. It was very peaceful there. While he examined the place I bowed down to idols in prayers. 

One of the tourists urged their driver to let him drive and he simply denied him for it’s a tough drive on those roads in that kind of a terrain. “A slightest mistake in your drive can take you thousand feet down the valley”, warned that driver. Arjun always pointed to a building from our room and even from the zoo which to him seemed like ‘Harry Potter’s Hogwarts’. We finally found it to be the Governor’s residence, which was another British structure. The old castle had some huge hallways, dance halls, and red-carpeted stairs leading to the present Governor’s room, antique royal furniture, fire places, and some rusted guns glorifying the past. Most of these pieces showcased were collected from the local kings and hunters and showcased here. How happening this place would have been in those days! We clicked some memories together near the huge Chinnar tree that was shedding fiery coloured leaves all yellow and red. In their compound were many trees, there were some play grounds where British played in their leisure; it was overall a well planned place. The entry gate building to this place served as police station in the Bollywood movie “*Koi mil Gaya*”.From there we headed to the Himalaya view point. On the way guide was suggesting us to take a horse ride up-hills but I declined them all. Maagi noodles meal has made it way to those high mountains too for its easy to cook and easy to serve also. I clicked a lot of pictures with layers of mountains though we could not see the Himalayan ranges because of clouds. Two or three peaks were visible and I managed to hallucinate the rest. People had mounted telescope for better vision on rent but we didn’t opt for it. On our way back we finally had a clear view of the mango shaped Nainilake, that’s otherwise said to be Goddess eye also. It’s from our mythical stories that when Devi Sati, wife of Lord Shiva burnt herself in anger, Lord Shiva danced with her body in rage and pieces of her dead body fell at various places which were identified to be places of  religious importance. It is said that Goddess eye fell here and created the lake.Arjun loved to hear those narrations from me. 

Then the guide-cum-driver requested us to at least get down at lover’s point and suicide point as we had refused to get down from the car at many places. There were many horse stables there, it was stinking horribly. I asked Arjun, “Why do we need to visit lover’s point at this stinky place when our love is lost!”. He instantly replied “We are rather visiting the suicide point, Baby”. It was indeed a silly place to see. 

It was followed by a visit to a botanical garden which had many medicinal plants. The entry gate was different like an old Chinese structure. What caught our attention was two beautiful dome shaped greenhouse. Eyeing at it, we looked for ways and climbed up many rocks to that point. It had a wide variety of cactus planted in it. It looked beautiful in the mists and yellow grass on the grounds near it. I wanted to paint it right there but we had more to see. There were benches around it, and we sat there gazing at the dense alpine forests, probably waiting for a leopard to show up! We drove to our next site. The roads were covered with oak, pine, fir standing firm with many of their close kin. There were many *tal*(lake) view points on the way but we were not so keen. On the way we hardly spoke to each other except Arjun asking me what else do you want to see and sometimes instructing me not to gaze at the valleys as it makes us feel sick. The temperature in the day was somewhere between 12-15 degree Celsius. Rejecting many places the driver stopped right below the waterfall and I jumped out of the car before he stopped it and ran to touch the water. It was so slippery that I couldn’t reach the water. Arjun came running to my rescue. Holding his hand with one hand I tried to dip myself into those freezing waters. I was excited like a kid and splashed water on Arjun too. It was so rejuvenating. I wanted to play some more. “I will leave your hand now, Enough Amber!” said Arjun. It was around 2pm and we were damn hungry. We placed ourselves on the terrace of a small restaurant right across the waterfall. Facing the fall we were trying to meditate in the gargling and gushing sound of the waterfall was filling the air. I wanted to plunge into those waters again. Though I ordered a lot of food but couldn’t eat. The dishes in which the food was served and the food itself seemed little unhygienic. I am a cleanliness and hygiene freak so with difficulty anything went down my throat. Arjun was quite disgusted with my grumblings, simply asked me to leave the food and concentrate on the fall rather. Following his orders I looked around the forests, the zigzag highways and went back to the waters. The mouth of the waterfall was on a elevation where we didn’t go. Instead we enjoyed the bottom view only. 

Cave garden, this was on my list. There are 6 caves there named Tiger, Panther, Bat, fox and so on. But we could go into 4 of them only as others were closed. The caves were really dangerous the hurt my head on one of them badly, sometimes we had to crawl and sometimes jump over the rocks to find our ways, small bulbs at places were glowing to show us the ways. I felt claustrophobic sometimes and Arjun ran away without bothering about me. At a point a stranger boy lend me his hand to help me as I was unable to climb a huge rock despite several attempts to do so. Arjun saw this and we got into a series usual arguments there. If he cared so much he should have helped me! His response was “I want you to learn and not be so dependent always”. Seriously what a husband I have! In the past also he didn’t care to stand by me when I needed him the most. I couldn’t stop tears rolling down my cheeks. After some time, he insisted me to experience flying fox, which though lasted for 15 seconds but was worth a moment. At the top of the cave garden was a sit-out where we relaxed for a while adoring the hills and floating clouds. Holding the railings in the periphery of the sit-out I was lost in deep thoughts. I was introspecting and going back in time to find lost love. In my mind I was asking the hills whether my chaotic life will reset or disintegrate. Only Arjun can tell you what he was thinking all this time because we never spoke about it. 

I had started complaining of a sick stomach when our car dropped us at Nainital’s main square. India is known for its cultural pluralism and at street level is seen through different kinds of religious building often coexisting at short distances from one another. But here it was a rare sight as a temple, mosque and church occurred around a shared public space such as a square. We walked up to the Naini temple and prayed therefor a while. And we proceeded to experience some boating at the lake; I wanted to sail on those huge yachts but could manage a long boat only. I asked our boatman to go close to hundreds of swans swimming in the lake. Pointing at the swan house he said they belonged to the municipality. It was as if many white clothed fairies had surrounded me. Arjun clicked several photos of those swans with me. The hills were on both sides, mists constantly flowing in and out were breathtaking!Trust me heavens fall here..We relaxed there for sometime appreciating Captain Barron’s gift. He was an English business man on his hunting trip in the year 1839 came across Nainital and was captivated by the beauty of itslake. He spotted it to have potential as a hill resort and established British barrack by the lake. People were feeding bread to the fishes in the lake. Those fishes seemed to be like those ‘river monsters’ that Jeremy Wade looks for around the world. Breaking the silence Arjun asked me “Is this our last trip together, Amber?” and looked into my eyes expecting some answer. I was speechless……. and long breathe…… and silence prevailed…. 

Close to it was Bhutia market where we shopped some woolen clothes and cute clips as I am very fond of them. 

Back in the room my stomach deteriorated and loose motion dampened the remaining fun of this trip. I grew more irritable to his unnecessary instructions. I was dying and he ordered some *parathas* and *paneer tikka masala* for both us. Heights of insensitivity! Having no way out and hunger made me eat those quietly. He gave me medicine that he carried. I slept for some time but rest of the night was in the washroom while he was snoring. I scolded him for his irritating snores and he held me pulled me into his arms and began “Once upon a time there lived a princess in …….”. 

We began the next day exchanging some conflicting statements. My condition was even worse. Our today’s plan of visiting Sattal and Bhimtal with the butterfly museum was certainly spoilt. Reluctantly he went out to get electoral powder and other medicines that my mother-in-law suggested. I was looking through the room’s window waiting for him. I could see the Chinnar trees, a distant cousin of maple tree was bright with shades of gold confirming the autumn. The fall is here….The outer world seemed to be reflecting my inner world. I was falling apart into pieces. I recited to myself “When winter comes, Can spring be far behind?”. May be I had a underlying hope somewhere that after a short break everything will fall back into its place in the spring in form of smiles and happiness. Should I let all my grudge fall apart with these leaves or let our relationship fall apart forever ….was constantly hovering in my mind. My heart was pounding furiously with these when Arjun came back with medicines. He looked after me a lot after that as if everything was normal between us. Words were certainly missing from our lips. At home his work and laptop kept him occupied with no time to spare for me. But here he seems to be so caring. Has he changed or it’s momentary? I could see Arjun looking out through the same window while my consciousness was succumbing to the soothing effects of the medicines and I fell asleep. 

After few hours of rest and medicines, my stomach seemed recovering. I wanted to stay back for some more days but we started our journey back to Kathgodam, between the hills, waving good bye to each and everything that appealed to us. 

Arjun carefully made my bed in the train, and from my bed I hung my head down, poked him to say “Good night”. 

Did the twists and turns of Nainital straightened any cords or remained the same? 

The difficult question persists. 

……………………………… 

The following day….Arjun is pouring oil into the *diyas(*lights*)*, I am arranging them on our balcony parapet and lighting it. It’s Diwali….. 

-Medha, 12th July,2015. 