From: Samridhi Nain <nainsamridhi@gmail.com>
Date: 29 June 2015 at 12:12
Subject: Submission of a story titled, 'The Tale of Beloved Sisters'.
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com
Bio: My name is Samridhi Neelam Nain. I'm 16 years old and I'm trying to become a writer. 

*The Tale of Beloved Sisters* 

‘Freedom!’ she exclaimed. A wave of happiness and satisfaction washed over Sonia Sharma. She had been visiting the Delhi Court for the past 8 months with a look of sorrow and remorse on her face. The divorce had put an end to her 11 year old marriage. She might have lost 4 kilos, her son Ronit to her mother-in-law but she had gained Rs. 20 lakh in her bank account and also, freedom. 

She made sure that everyone was acquainted with the fact that her own, her very own beloved sister had been the flame which had burned her bond with her husband. As she lay on the bed of her house (which had been in name) she once again felt like that stupid 17 year old Sonia who had defied her parents to marry to the man of her choice. The love lasted for a couple of years, after that Ronit was born and she lost herself in motherhood but then slowly, she felt that she was in the wrong loop. That the life which she was living, was not hers but somebody else’s. 

She went away to her mom’s place for some days to think over the matter in solitude. There, she had come on the conclusion that she needed to separate from Ravi; also she did not want Ronit to lose the schooling in Delhi. He’ll be much more modern, more advanced if he stayed in Delhi then with her and even if he did come with her, then how the hell was she going to find enough work to support herself and her 9 year old son? She can’t. It’ll be bitter but it’s necessary. 

But when she had come back and found her husband with her sister, Maya, she was sure that what she was doing was right. Ronit came after a few hours later. She wasn’t crying, why should she, it was his loss that he chose number 2. Maya hardly knows the spelling of ‘spelling’! 

But now, it was all in the past. She was turning a new leaf and her future will not be filled with thoughtless decisions or stupid lovey-dovey moments! She was ready for the 6:30 pm flight to Chandigarh (yes, a flight, thanks to the 7 figure in her bank account). 

Even though she had a roof on her head but the roof was in Delhi and she knew that a 7 figure bank balance will be reduced to a single zero if she lived in Delhi without a job. She had decided to put her flat on rent and go and live at her mom’s place...no, she wouldn’t be able to bear the taunts of her dad’s for being the first divorcee in the history of her family. She’ll live with her sister, Amrita in Mohali instead. 

She’ll land in Chandigarh at around 8 pm and by then her sister will be free from work. Perfect, she’ll call her and ask her to pick up from the airport. 

It was all according to the plan. She called Amrita, Amrita came filled with anger and hate for her sister. Amrita yelled at Sonia for coming unannounced but once the nukes rolled down her cheeks, Amrita had to calm herself down and directed her anger towards that faithless bastard hound, Ravi Mehta. 

It wasn’t that Amrita didn’t love her sister but she lived with her boyfriend, Rahul and she knew that Rahul loved her but it wasn’t Heer-Ranjha or Romeo-Juliet love. Although, Sonia had promised her that before making any move towards Rahul she would kill herself. She pledged that before seeing Rahul in ‘that’ way, she’ll kill herself but Amrita was no fool to believe her beloved sister. It was a guy in question not a toy, the guy who was the half-payer of the rent, groceries, dinners and supplier of gifts. So, she never left them alone. She was home before Rahul, went after he went but when the Delhi meeting came, she knew her relationship was in trouble. 

It was a chance to secure a Rs. 6500 raise in her salary. She couldn’t say no and had to Delhi by train (she didn’t have any divorced husband). 

‘I’m not making any move towards Rahul,’ Sonia reminded herself, ‘I’m making love to him! There’s a difference!’ secured and convinced that she won’t have to kill herself now. She slept in the warmth of embrace of Rahul Khanna as they laid skin to skin on Amrita Sharma, Sonia’s beloved sister’s bed with her picture overlooking them! 

