From: Sudha g.tilak <sgtilak@gmail.com>
Date: 19 July 2015 at 12:01
Subject: Submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

*The Believers* 

By Sudha G Tilak 

The time has come, my friends, to tell you the truth. 

The believers may doubt the veracity of this tale, coming from me. For I am a known skeptic in the neighbourhood, the friendly doubter, placing my trust in all things empirical. The young and successful may not find their thrills in a strange story that came of an abandoned endeavour. 

I am a ‘broker’, a deal maker, a fixer, say what you will. I am a real estate agent who has been in the business since the early days when Madras knew no apartment complexes and banks disbursing home loans, or builder mafias and land sharks who struck gold building concrete blocks. I’ve diversified my portfolio now, as they say. I play with stocks and shares and also sell life insurance, promising benefits to people over their deaths. However, my ears 

are still cocked to news of that piece of land up for grabs; or this haunted house that’s selling cheap; and the tenant who sub-lets the beachside bungalow for filming tele-serials and those who have turned their farmhouses into oases for a little love by the shore. Oh, yes, *saar,* my ears are sharper than Mani, the faithful mutt, who prowls our lane each night, sniffing out the leftovers my wife leaves him outside our gates. 

Now this house I live in is a marvel, if I say so myself. I bought it cheap thirty years ago. My wife howled when I left the city limits to sink my feet in the sands that resembled a desert all the way to Mahabalipuram. The fat rascals from my wife’s side, especially her brothers who set up fancy shops in malls these days selling perfume and ladies’ underwear, are nothing but a flashy duo who look down upon me whilst they holiday with their fatter wives, dripping gold and silk in Sentosa Island in Singapore or return 

with nylon flowers from Thailand. 

My wife is happiest when she is gifted packets of chocolates and chiffon saris and cheap perfumes by them. 

They pay no heed to me, maker of homes and keeper of secrets. 

****** 

It is true that when we built this house and moved in, the place was deserted, an unending wasteland of beach divided by a thin strip of road along the Coromandel Coast, going straight to neighbouring Pondicherry. The nearest provision store was an hour’s drive away as were the doctors’ clinics and other facilities. The locality was surrounded by casuarina trees that howled and whooshed like angry moonis as they fought the wind on stormy nights. 

Our lives in the quiet area were livened only when film shootings for movies were filmed. Given the long strip of tarmac and dunes these were for sequences that were dramatic escapades involving cops and robbers chases; kidnapping episodes in white Ambassadors; molested heroines crying for help against fat rapists, waiting for the hero to air-drop from tree-tops to rescue them. 

My wife would be excited and often get an autograph from a 

star or allow a heroine to use our toilet if the filmmaking stretched through the day. But on other days of the year she would unfailingly wail: “We will be murdered in this wasteland, a godforsaken place, a result of your crazy idea and your stupid job that makes no money for a woman to live decently”. 

She always followed that with a warning uttered under her breath that a “templeless town” is only for heathens. 

Our house is painted bright green with shiny yellow windows. It looks colourful and can be located from the highway before you turn into our lane. 

The living quarters are a set of box-like rooms on the ground floor ­­- two bedrooms and a kitchen, alongside a dining and drawing room. I am also proud of its Madras terrace. My wife uses the terrace to dry our laundry and sun-dry pickles in fat ceramic vats, curry leaves and cumin and chillies and spices she uses in her cooking. On nights after a big row with her, usually a result of her unanswered prayers to end our childlessness, it’s my haven to leave the rooms below in a huff and lie on a charpoy on the terrace, stare at the dark skies, and allow the sea breeze to cool my humiliation. 

The house has a front yard where I park my grey scooter. My perch is the small verandah in front of the house on my grandfather’s reclining chair. 

This is where I lounge, shirtless in my *lungi* and watch the world pass by the road, reading the *Dina Thanthi* newspaper and my staple of the weekly magazine *Junior Vikatan* for what goes on in Tamil society, the crimes of passion and greed; the salacious world of cinema and their grubby heroes and corpulent heroines; the chicanery of its politicians and the Tamil people’s obeisance to faith. 

It was on one such morning that I met Subramani. I was dozing, lulled by the warmth in the air, in the chair. My mild snores were arrested when I snapped my eyes open to the gentle clink of my small iron gates. His face was angular and he was dressed in a white veshti and a checked shirt, with a towel wrapped around his head. I mistook him to be the odd fisherman who found his way into the land from the beachfront and was ready to dismiss him. 

“I want to rent a place here”, he spoke up, pointing to the little placard on my gate. It was a square piece of hard paper that read: 

*To Let/ To Buy * 

*Contact Broker* 

His voice was soft unlike my raspy one. I didn’t make an effort to climb out of my chair. 

“What’s your budget? Do you need a seaside double storeyed house like the White men live, or a big bungalow?” I asked, my voice conveying an air of superciliousness. 

“Oh, all I need is a small cottage with a large space around it for my work”, he said, turning his head to let his eyes wander down the lane. 

“This neighbourhood is strictly for residential purposes,” I said curtly. “We don’t allow petty shops selling cigarettes, betel leaves, soda or toffees here”, I said. 

“Oh, yes, but a clever broker can surely fix what his client wants”, he said with a knowing smile. His smile lit up his face, unshaven and unwashed as it was, and his eyes twinkled. 

“What sort of work do you do?” I asked, given that he didn’t seem to be put off by my brusqueness. 

“I am a sculptor of idols”, he said. 

“Ah, you make gods, do you?” I asked my tongue firmly in my cheek. 

“I am just a *sthapathi *who’s carrying on with his ancestral craft”, he said with a shy smile of the title earned by the community of artisans in Tamil Nadu who make idols of stone and metal that are enshrined in Hindu temples of worship. 

Before I could hold forth on my political affiliations and he could respond, my wife, who no doubt, had been eavesdropping on our conversation from behind the front door,  walked in with a polite smile and said, “Please come in, the sun is scorching”. 

Subramani bent his head in deference to the wishes of the lady of the house and let himself in. My wife dragged a plastic chair and set it on the verandah beside me. “Sit, please”, she urged and placed a jug of water and glass on the verandah sill and slipped inside. Subramani sat down on the chair and took a moment to unfurl the towel around his head and wipe his perspiration around his brow and neck. 

As he poured the water into the tumbler I noticed his hands. They were large hands and bore the marks of a hardworking stone 

artisan. Their joints were calloused and looked rough and the nails of a couple of fingers were already dead and dull. A thought passed my head of how those hands would feel on a baby’s soft skin. 

“Do you have children?” I asked needlessly. 

“I have two sons who are students at Swamimalai Government College for Temple Design and Craft”, he said. I found a streak of envy cross my heart as I took in his dark hair without a sign of grey though I guessed that he would be a few years younger than me. 

I found my reserve melting before his mild manners. And help him I did. I found him a plot of land to rent for a reasonable price a street away from mine. It was a corner plot, smaller than others and slightly away from the neighbourhood houses with a couple of empty plots beside it. The cottage had basic living quarters and Subramani moved in soon with his nondescript wife. He built a makeshift roof with asbestos inside the compound. He had a 

small three-wheeled cycling cart for transportation. He used it to fetch and carry the smaller pieces of stones including blocks of soft soapstone, hard green stone and the toughest of them all-granite. On other days the cart stood parked inside the compound of his house. 

I found myself fascinated by his hereditary craft of icon making and would often swing by in the afternoons to his work shed. He would explain the diktats of stone carving, the details laid out in the scriptures, *grantha, * *shastras* he had to memorise  as part of his education for temple stone carving; the metaphysics of iconography that he learnt as part of the oral tradition handed over by his grandfather, a *sthapathi* himself; the use of appropriate tools for the right icon design, and the choice of stones and the rituals dictated by tradition to observe before embarking on making an icon 

for sanctification in a temple that would accord it the status of a deity. 

He spoke of the descendants of master sculptors from Thanjavur who later migrated to Swamimalai as the alluvial soil of the Kauveri river basin seemed most suited for learning the craft. There would be special prayers after an idol was completed when the idol’s eyes were set to ‘life’ before it was sent to be consecrated as deities in temples for worship. 

Many a time, I sensed a vague sense of peace come over me as I reclined on his charpoy even as the silence was punctuated by the sharp tic-tic of his chisel and hammer sculpting away on the stone. 

Subramani would remove his vest, and bunch his *lungi* and tuck it tight by his waist and sit on a low wooden plank and go about his sculpting. I would watch him chisel a face, an eye, sharpen and nick a proboscis of Ganesha, the elephant god, the rivulets of hair that would cascade down the shoulders of Siva, the god of 

destruction, and the extraordinary beauty that danced upon the lips of the god of valour, Murugan. He remained a busy man. 

On some nights I would have him over to join me in my terrace and to share a drink, away from the collective censure of our wives. He was not much of a drinker but gave me able company. 

My wife ignored us and seemed lenient even on occasions when he would help me to bed after my inebriation got the better of me. 

It was on a Saturday morning when I was going through my newspapers in the verandah that I found Subramani clanking my iron gates. I looked up and found his sanguine face excited as he shared the news. It was an order for a new temple to be built in neighbouring city of Kanchipuram. The money would be good as the funding came from a local politician, who wanted his involvement to be a guarded secret. A goddess, his first ever, for he had never made one. 

That evening we sat on my terrace to celebrate his new venture.  I slurred into my drink, “Subbu, is it not ironic that someone likes you has orders pouring in from various parts of the city and neighbouring towns in this day and age?” 

“Why do you say that? You don’t find me talented?” he asked. 

“Oh, I didn’t question your talent. I mean, this is the part of India which loudly proclaimed its commitment to atheism even as that north Indian Gandhi sang bhajans to god; we scrawled graffiti proclaiming, ‘No God’; we abused temple goers and called them fools. Sixty years since those days a city like Chennai has the highest number of temples in any metropolis in India. Every street junction is consecrated with a tiny god to ward off evil, temples that were abandoned have found devotees; little blocks of black 

idols under roadside peepul trees are deemed holy and  bathed in milk and sandal paste,” I explained. 

Subramani sniggered hard at this. “The battle of the past was to make god egalitarian. And now all of us, big or small, high or low, outcaste or high caste want a piece of god’s action”, he said with a wan smile. 

We spoke long into that night. As I closed my eyes late that night, lying on my cot on the terrace, I sleepily watched Subramani’s vanishing form going down the stairs, and felt a fondness I’ve never felt before for any person. He came closest to being called a friend in all my forty five years of life. 

************** 

A change came over Subramani since he began work on the idol of the Goddess. He had built a makeshift area in his workshop with bedsheets so that the sculpting of the goddess was done in secrecy. When I asked him if I could take a peek playfully, he requested to let him be. 

It was a busy time for me too. A businessman from Malaysia had arrived with real estate interests. He was wealthy, had money and was ready to buy properties as he had decided to come back to Chennai for good. It was a good business opportunity for me and I followed him daily, offering him ideas to buy a cinema hall, a large piece of land for an apartment complex, department stores and throwing such carrots his way. I took him on trips to 

cities like Coimbatore and Tiruchi and elsewhere down the fancy beachside properties down the Coromandel Coast Road. 

It was late one night that I found Subramani’s wife standing hesitantly by my gate as I returned home. 

“Is all well, young sister?” I asked, bringing my scooter to halt beside her. I was curious that the shy, plump woman who had 

never held conversations with me, and would silently offer tea at their home before vanishing into her kitchen’s darkness and never 

befriended my chatty wife was here so late at night, alone. 

“There’s bereavement in my family. It’s my uncle, and I am leaving home by bus early tomorrow morning. Please take care of my husband as he’s not been well for the past few days”, she said, concern in her voice before she walked back towards their house. 

The next morning my client from Malaysia phoned me and I sped away to his side. It wasn’t until the day after that I walked to Subramani’s house after my dinner and well past my usual bed time. 

There was a small light in the front yard of his house that cast its shadows long and dark about the place. I felt a little spooked at some of the headless stone figures, a few faceless figures, their features yet to be etched as they lay on the ground in the workshop. 

I found Subramani sitting among the shadows on his wooden plank among the stones. 

“What’s the matter? Not yet in bed?” I asked. 

He looked up and asked, “Can you help me?” 

“How much money do you need?” I asked in response. 

He shook his head vigorously. “No, not money. I’ve made a mistake. I need to discard her”, he said, the words coming out of him in a rush. 

“Who?” I asked, feeling the night’s wind slightly chilly. 

He wordlessly pointed to the spot where a stone idol stood shrouded in cloth. 

I picked the lantern that stood near his feet and walked to the spot. I found my hands suddenly clammy as I whisked the cloth away from the statuette.  The figurine was sculpted out of black unpolished granite and was some three feet tall perhaps. 

I held my lantern up to take a closer look. The stone visage was breathtaking, a countenance at once beatific and strangely erotic, in the angular points of its jawline, the curved moonscape of the forehead, the lotus eyes and proud nose and the jaunty thrust of its lips. The idol’s shoulders were sculpted with jewels and 

sloped to burst forth in a pair of breasts, full and smooth, and then curve and dip towards a small waist to flare over rounded hips and thighs. The idol stood fixed on a pedestal of stone, the whole sculpture a monolith no doubt. 

I found my hand going out to touch the face but checked myself and muttered, “It is beautiful”. I looked the statue up again and it was then that I noticed. The right hand that would usually be sculpted in a posture of offering divine benediction, palms held up, had been rendered mutant. 

“What happened to the hand?” I asked, the beauty of the idol suddenly turning grotesque in my eyes at the malformed hand. 

“It’s here”, Subramani said holding a piece of black stone, the size of an upturned palm, with nimble fingers in his hands. 

“I was careless and the hand got broken, it's a flaw on my part. I 

can’t keep it here. Just help me abandon it’, he said, clutching my shirt. 

I took the stone hand from Subramani and knotted it along with the idol. I turned around to find Subramani pushing along his cycle cart. We both heaved and puffed and carried the heavy idol and placed it on the cart.  I walked along as Subramani laboured to pedal and move on. We went past the neighbourhood, past a stretch of shrub land and up the main road. 

We crossed the highway to go down a slope into the beach sands down a makeshift road of pebbles and stones before the path ended in dunes and the tricycle came to a halt. We must have done a good two hours from our home and were profusely sweating, bathed in grime, dirt and a strange guilty fear. 

We lugged the heavy icon, dragging it down the sands, lifting and carrying it together until our aching limbs could do no more and finally reached the shore in a near collapse from our exertions. The idol fell from our tired hands in a cloudburst of sand at the water’s edge and the night waves greedily lapped at it. We hoped the night’s tides would wash it into the ocean’s belly and left pushing the cart, feeling heavier with our thoughts. 

************ 

It wasn’t until the mid morning that I awoke, my limbs aching and head pounding from the previous night’s exertions. I quickly dressed and left to call on Subramani. He was sitting at his doorstep and welcomed me with his old smile, as though the previous night has not happened. 

“You all right?” he asked. 

I nodded and asked, “And, you?” 

He stood up and walked to me and held my hands. “Promise me you won’t speak of what happened last night to any soul, not even …” his voice dipped and he looked down. 

“… my wife, though I feel you’ve overreacted. You can make another idol or even repair the hand”, I reasoned. 

He shook his head and said, “I am off to Swamimalai for good now”, he said. “My sons will come in a week’s time and clear the workshop out and return the keys. Please pass them on to 

the owner and you can return the advance money to my son”, he said. 

“Subramani don’t do this”, I said, a plea in my voice. “What went wrong? There’s no need to flee as though in shame,” I beseeched. 

“The desecration of it all”, he muttered, before abruptly walking away from me. 

************ 

Today is an auspicious day. The famous godman who founded the Fertility Goddess cult will arrive this morning to offer special prayers and offer darshan to his followers at the temple precincts. It’s a beautiful temple of exquisite stone carvings and stands upon the sea shore. The temple was built some four years ago and was funded by a wealthy Chetty businessman from Malaysia. 

Haven’t you visited that temple yet, dear friend? 

It is the temple of the One-Hand Mother Goddess. My wife tells me that the temple’s *sthala purana* goes that the Mother Goddess’s bounty is unmatched. The jealous celestial gods and demons of heaven and hell got together to defeat her in a battle and flung her down into the ocean bed. An ogre took the form of a shark and snapped her hand and she chose to float up from the ocean’s belly to offer benediction for her devotees upon earth. 

She is the goddess of countless boons. A small shrine at the back of the temple houses the upturned palm of the goddess that was bitten off by the shark. 

Devotees pray for the granting of their needs by placing a handful of cowrie shells and millet as offering at her feet on Tuesdays and Fridays. 

Such is the awesomeness of the goddess that our once wasteland of a neighbourhood has now turned into a pilgrim spot for devotees from afar in recent years. 

Why, even our seedless marital life has been blessed by my 

wife’s prayers to the One-Hand Mother Goddess. 

We now have a toddler,whose chubby hands and shy smiles makes a crusty couple like us lighten up. 

My wife’s faith has finally had its reward. You may trust my word for it. 

Ends 
