From: Siddharth Gupta <siddharth.gupta68@gmail.com>
Date: 21 July 2015 at 11:34
Subject: Submission
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>

I AM NOT A BEGGAR 

Well the day started as expected. I was staying with Shubham and 4 of them. There were nice to me. Sachin seems to be getting angry last night. But i don't care about him. So i wake up and go through all my daily work. 

Important event was when they call for showing our engineering drawing answer copies. Everybody somewhere in there mind were feared about them. Heartbeat was rising. Lot of thoughts were passing through the mind. 

"Roll no. 47 ,24 marks" it was thrilling shivering fearful. I walked and collected the sheet and it clearly says 24/100. It was a tight slap on my face . For the first time in my life i was fail ,short of 9 marks for passing. My heart was beating so loud that would jump out. My brain was totally empty. The thoughts that were striking previously had all gone. I was shocked. I truly did not expect this to happen. The other 5 of my friends were passed on boundary like 32,34 etc. 

It was totally my mistake, the copy was well checked and corrected. Ravindra randa the teacher announced " plz submit your copies,if you have any problem then retain them but i am quite strict about increasing any marks. 

Most of my fellow students who have cleared the exam were submitting were moving out of the class. I was watching them and thinking i could have been one of them. I was thinking about my parents reaction. How i am going to face them. I already had sold out my books. I was preparing myself for next attempt. It was very difficult task. It was like i am forcing my brain to accept the reality. 

There were a few students left in the class. There was Abhishek Pratap Singh. He got 25 ,he just need 1 marks for grace. So we were on the same Level. We discussed to go at last and try to convince  him that we are passed in every other subject please have mercy on us . So as per our plan we waited. It was very difficult for me though. Another boy Dhurv ask for increment ,instead Mr Randa cut off 8 marks and now his new total was 14. 4 to 5 students went before me. Some were favoured , some were smashed. Now it was Abhishek ,he hold his sheet and sit in front of Mr. randa. He asked "so whats your problem". APS answered " Sir ,i just need 1 marks to pass,please sir " The teacher smiled and said "see child i am not here for any favour , tell me if you have any doubt or else submit your sheet". Abhi pointed on 3-4 questions but he rejected them every time. He urged again " sir please just 1 marks". The teacher looked at him and then in his copy . At last he raise 1 marks in some question and he was passed with grace. Now it was my turn I looked at Mr Randa , he was smiling (must be thinking something). I presented my sheet in front of him. He said " which question". I pointed on one . But i know it was well checked . He rejected . Then he looked at me and said " you also want grace". I said " yes sir,just 2 marks". I thought he will tear my sheet and would kick me out of the room. but what happened was totally opposite he took my sheet and just added 2 marks . " Satisfied" he said. I said " yes sir" . I was shocked . I just put the sheet aside and walked away from the room. 

Can i say something stupid ? I was not happy. Not because i get less marks or something but by his reaction towards me . I was thinking that he did not find me worth to lecture about getting more marks next time or telling me that I should change my path . It was depressing , even depressing then getting fail. To know that " you are not worth for anything , was the most striking feeling i had ever encountered. Then i questioned myself "Am I". All my memories were getting inside my brain. What i did when was preparing. Truly i had not practised the subject. I was a total 0 in the subject. In Hindi we say it "भीक मे मिलना" . He had given marks in mercy. Like i you used give money to beggars only because i thought they are not worth for anything. Why are they even born. And now i am a beggar , i wonder why i am born. I lost respect for siddharth. I was alone in that corridor , i fall and sat on my knees and shouted " No" as loud as i can . My eyes turned wet , I was shivering like anything . I collected my bag and rushed to Mr randa. The room was locked , i inquired with his assistant and he said " Your copies are already submitted " . I said " what " ( loud and shocking tone)  " where,please tell me please". He pointed towards examination department. I ran towards the controller " sir, i want to see my sheet". "sorry the time is complete,we do not have permission " :- he said. I said " sir , you don't get it I want to cut my marks,you know cut( i had turned into some psycho) common show it to me , i will do it myself" . He hold my hand and dragged me out of the room . I fall down , then again fall and hold his legs " sir please,please it is very important" he kicked me and shut the door before me" and i shouted" I am not a beggar , i don't want your fuck". 

And there i was a beggar surrounded by people laying on  floor,weeping and left in regret .