From: Padma Varadharajan <padma.varadharajan@live.com>
Date: 2 August 2015 at 18:03
Subject: submission
To: "outofprintmagazine@gmail.com" <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>
Bio: Padma lives in California. She works as a software design engineer, and loves to write whenever she finds time. Her work has previously appeared in East Coast Literary Review. 

At the End 

I am the anti-Icarus. The Gods built me wings and beseech me to soar, but I have no ambition. And I'm not stupid. They all tell me I am destined for greatness. But I don't seek it. I'm told that happiness lies in effort in the quest for glory. How does that even work? I've been cursed with potential, and I hover here on the brink of greatness like a trapped fly near a flame, desperately wishing I could lose my wings and plummet into the welcoming mediocrity. 

* 

I stand just inside the gates of the guild. My job is simple - to ring the giant Golden bell dangling up on a platform next to me to announce every visitor. I plug my ears, pull the Golden gong from its leather sheath and sound the bell that reverberates through the great hallways of the guild. In between visitors, when there is time, I bring out the ladder and polish the magnificent object till it shines so radiantly that it can be seen from a mile away. This is my life. This is my choice. 

The great guild. The greatest amongst the sixty four guilds in the kingdom, specialists in exercising the power of the mind. Hundreds come, eager to try their luck as apprentices. Few have the skill, and fewer still graduate to be practitioners or masters. The amount of control and concentration needed to master the craft, even if there is underlying capability, is incomprehensible to most. Practice. More practice. Penance. Deprivation. Control. Austerity. And all that sacrifice for what? 

I was hailed as one of the guild's greatest students barely a year ago. But then I've always been known as a non-believer. Not in the limitless potency that remains untapped in the mind, but in the purpose of tapping into that potency. What is achieved through mind control, except a God like exalted status amongst the sixty four guilds? It seems like life-long deprivation of the simplest of pleasures is a heavy price to pay for that prestige. There ought to be easier ways to earn a livelihood. Look at the weavers. Menials, my brethren say with obvious contempt. But they look happy to me. Isn't that the purpose? 

To practice the craft is to unlock the Energy in the mind. Restrictions of the physical world can be peeled away like layers off an onion when we harness that energy through control. Turns out there is too much energy to be unleashed in mine. I can control not just my mind but also objects around me. I can control other minds and changed their futures and destinies. To practice my craft is to let that energy consume everything and everyone around me as it spirals out of control. 

* 

The messenger walks up to me. "Sir, you are to appear in the Great Hall tomorrow morning" he says. I might be the first gatekeeper who everyone addresses with such reverence. That's a good indication that while I might be desperate to move on, the world around me will never let me. 

"This is from the Grandmaster?" 

"I've been told that the Council will be present" 

The Council includes the la de crème from twenty one top guilds, including the Grandmaster from ours. What could the grand occasion be? Another livelihood? The messenger wouldn't know. But I am going to dream of a new beginning at some place so far away that I might eventually be spared from the constant tortuous guilt like I've murdered someone by giving up my destiny. I hope to find something remotely resembling peace. 

* 

The mind readers are aided in their powers by the Elder Spirit that resides in a chamber in the Great Hall. A chamber no one has entered in five hundred years. The Elder Spirit was once a young Grandmaster whose body was overpowered by his Energy. Though the body shut down, his spirit soared, communicating with other mind readers through telepathy, healing everybody it touched, and bestowing peace on all who lived in the kingdom for as long as they could preserve the body intact. 

When the comatose body withered away and the heart almost stopped beating, the Council decided to preserve his body in a sacred chamber in the hope that his Energy would linger and look upon generations of mind readers to come. You see, it's our belief that though the Energy resides in the mind, it belongs to the spirit. While the Energy is boundless, the spirit is bound by time and space. And so they built a special chamber, and sealed his body in it. Telepathy ceased, but we believe the Energy lives on. Hence, the legacy of the Elder Spirit. It's a story the kids are told, to teach of heroism, sacrifice and legacy. To me, it's all desperately tragic. Is the spirit really still trapped inside a sealed chamber for over five hundred years? 

* 

On this day, exactly a year back, I turned my back on my kind. I didn't want to sit in meditation halls from dawn to dusk. I didn't want to communicate through telepathy. I didn't want to starve myself to demonstrate my control over my five senses. I didn't want to live an austere life bereft of love because emotions cause ripples and destroy clarity. I didn't want to fear my own potency. I asked the Grandmaster to just let me go. 

An elite rejecting his elitism was unheard of. The Council took turns probing my mind and they found nothing. No unholy possession or mind manipulation. If I didn't want to be an elite, they couldn't force me into being one, because free will. But now they all look at me like I'm contagious. Now I get the hushed whispers behind my back, the half-accusing half-pitying glances and prayers for my soul. 

I come from a lineage that is renowned for producing Grandmasters. But I am the gatekeeper. I stand here because my life is irrevocably bound to serving at the guild. I stand here because this is my choice, a livelihood that will not involve any aspect of using my mind. Now I should get to live the way I want to without engaging in a perpetual battle to control my mind. But strangely enough, I continue to live the life of austerity I've always lead. Maybe it's too ingrained in me. The idea of indulgence still remains as unattainable and far-fetched as before, my entire being revolts against it. Trapped fly. Flame. 

* 

The door to the Great Hall opens and I enter with an unruffled, calm mind that comes from years and years of practice, with no hint of trepidation. The apprentices flank the two sides in a neat file, their long robes pristinely white and their feet and stance in perfect alignment. The practitioners stand behind them, in the all too familiar green robes. I can spot the Grandmaster seated on his pedestal across the hall, with the ten masters seated on his right, and the twenty other Council men seated on his left. The Elder chamber lies behind the pedestal. 

In front of the Grandmaster, there is a raised platform containing four rows of eight candle stands, each holding an unlit candle. Thirty two candles. One symbolically for each apprentice. I can feel all eyes on me as I walk across the hall. I bow down before the Grandmaster, trying very hard not to think of him as an uncle who cares a little too much for his nephew. Most of those assembled here can read my mind. I have to be careful what I think. 

The Grandmaster steps out from the pedestal in all his glory, his eyes boring into mine, willing and daring me to engage my mind to block out his mind probe. The mind readers are aware of the presence of another mind probing their own. Hence the ability to exercise our power to block and protect our thoughts. I lower my gaze in submission, I offer no resistance. My mind is an open book for anyone to parse. I'm not playing this game. 

"If Mohammed will not go to the mountain, the mountain must come to Mohammed" he says. With all due respect, I just want to be left alone. 

"How long will you continue to rebel? It's time to use our power for good." he continues. 

"It's not a power. It's a curse. I cannot control its potency." 

"Then you must practice harder." 

"I gave up that life." 

"That decision is not up to you. You resolved to give up that life. But did you really do it? Are you capable of doing it?" 

I sigh. Well, he's right in a way. Nothing has changed. If I don't meditate, I feel like my mind is going to implode. Physical labor that doesn't engage my mind means my mind is still free to pursue its existence in the higher planes of realization. I cannot debase it. "So what would you have me do?" 

"Light the candle" he says. 

Lighting candles. It's a cheap parlor trick that I could do when I was ten, but projecting the energy in the mind to actual physical energy in the real world is far from easy. It takes incredible focused effort. The mind readers are known for their mind probes and mind healing, not for this whole razzle dazzle. Most masters can barely manage a smoking wick anyway. So it seems a rather odd ask. My uncle is certainly persistent. And what would I do lighting candles anyway? Is there any vacancy in a circus? 

He smiles. Oh right. He read that. I close my eyes and half-heartedly search for the presence of the energy. "It's not there anymore" I say, "I've lost it." The Grandmaster smiles again. "You can stay at the ancestral house" he says, "And we will meditate together tomorrow morning" 

* 

I return to my house for the first time in a year. I can sense my father's presence everywhere as I stand outside the door. It has been more than two years since he passed away, but the ancestral house will never be rid of his aura. How could I possibly live in this house? The Grandmaster asks too much of me. I was also closer to my uncle than I ever was to my father. My father became the Grandmaster when I was barely five, and our relationship had always been strange and distant, more master-apprentice than father-son. My uncle was elected as Grandmaster after my father's death. 

I push on the door and it's locked. I use the knocker. I can sense reluctance and fear inside the house long before I hear the sound of someone approaching from the other side. My mother opens the door. She hasn't changed a bit in one year. "Don't you dare read my mind" she says defiantly, and I look away. 

"I don't want to" I reply. 

"I heard you were back" she says, leaving the door ajar and stepping in. 

I should probably follow her inside, but I'm paralyzed. My mother is a strange woman. You'd have thought that someone who isn't very fond of mind readers wouldn't marry into the guild's first family that is famous for producing Grandmasters, but that's exactly what she did. I mean, I hate this too, but it's not like I had a choice as to which guild I was born into. So I inherited my dad's skill and my mom's hatred of that skill. Match made in hell. What am I even doing here? My mother comes out again when she realizes I didn't follow her inside. "Come in." she says. 

My mother is not of this guild. Her father was a farmer. She comes from a warm, affectionate family, and hence finds our ways of detachment a tad too stifling. She wanted to cultivate the ability to love in me, but attachment and affection and love are cardinal sins in our guild. Obviously, my father would have none of it. He saw the greatness in me and pushed me harder than he did with his other apprentices. He blamed my mother for my rebellious spirit. And my mother blamed him for my natural gravitation towards mind control. They both hated me because they hated each other and saw that reflection in me. 

Her advice to my father still rings in my head. "What's inside him cannot be controlled. That energy cannot be tamed by practice. If you let him wield it, the guild will burn, and all of you with it." 

"I have to leave" I say. 

"Where?" she asks, "The Grandmaster said you would be staying here" 

"I'll do fine at the gatekeeper cottage" 

"There is someone else living there now" 

"I'll manage" I say, and turn around. I can feel her eyes on my back. There's nothing left to say. I walk away. 

* 

"You haven't slept." 

I am in the Grandmaster's chamber. It is early morning. "Well yes" I tell him, "You gave away the gatekeeper cottage to someone else." 

"That job is not for you" 

"Then make me the gardener." 

"You are an elite" he says, "You can't turn your back on your legacy." 

"What if my legacy is something I loathe with every fiber of my being?" 

"I am done using my voice" he says, "Unless you're ready to open a mind connection, just sit next to me and meditate." 

There is only one thing I am sicker of than mind connections. And that is meditation. I meditate all the time. I can do it with my eyes open, ringing the golden bell, even talking to someone. There is a part of my mind always deeply absorbed with itself, silently working away on tapping into the spirit. 

"Please. Can we talk?" I ask him. 

He shakes his head. "Meditate" he says. 

* 

I fear the Energy because I fear the fate of the Elder Spirit. What if my body cannot handle its potency? What if my poor, defenseless, overpowered body is locked away and my spirit is trapped in a sealed chamber for the next five hundred years? What if an uncontrollable burst of energy translates into physical energy in the real world and harms people in its radius? 

The energy is simmering in one hidden corner of my mind. It doesn't need my activation. Never has. It is never dormant when not used, like it is with other mind readers. It's like glowing embers, quietly at work, hiding away a part of my mind from the outside world, blocking out mind probes so deftly that the mind readers don't even realize its presence. It's an unreachable compartment protected by all the power my mind possesses. It took me months to lock this power into a smaller presence that doesn't consume my entire mind. If I let it out, I don't know if I can ever lock it in again. 

Deep in my meditation, diving deep into my own subconscious, I am aware. As I reach towards it, something strange happens. I can sense the presence of another mind, a different Energy. The Grandmaster? But he doesn't have the power to reach this part of my mind. No one does. The spirit cannot be trapped by anything in the physical world. I stay because it is my choice. It is communicating with me. What is it? The Elder spirit?! The embers crackle into fire and there's a whiplash that feels like my mind is going to implode. I snap out of meditation and grasp my head as the pain sears through my body and slowly fades away. There's a hand on my shoulder. I open my eyes and the Grandmaster is looking at me. "What is it?" he asks. I shake my head. "I'm just having a headache." 

* 

We are in the Great Hall once more. I am staring at the candles. "It's still not there" I lie. I can block their stupid mind probes without them even knowing it's being blocked. This is ridiculous. What are we all doing here? My eyes strays to the Elder chamber behind the pedestal. I must have dreamt it up. That Energy hasn't communicated with anyone in hundreds of years. 

"You are not even trying" says the Grandmaster. 

I sigh. What is the point in rebelling if there is nothing to rebel for? What is the point in trying to feel deep emotion when the underlying capability is absent? Let go. I feel the presence of the Elder spirit again. The flood gates open against my will and my Energy surges back to fill my mind. I close my eyes and I can feel my eyeballs burn from the flame seemingly in the center of my forehead. 

"Control it" warns the Grandmaster, "Remember. The delicate touch, not the sledgehammer." 

My head feels like it's going to explode.  It has been a while. "I cannot help you if you don't let me in" he says. 

But I'm angry. Angry with the Grandmaster for starting this all over again. Angry with the Energy that flows through me so effortlessly with terrifying magnitude. Angry with everyone standing around watching like I'm a performing monkey. Angry that they foolishly think I will be able to somehow contain this with practice. I can feel my hands trembling. I hear someone yelling. I look around to see all the candles burning, entire candles with the candle stands, metal and wax gloriously ablaze. I did that. 

What magnitude of projected energy would this have taken? How did it come from one man? The Council men and women are standing now, and there is a palpable sense of fear all around me. The Grandmaster looks unperturbed though. He glances over casually at the candles, and the flames are extinguished, leaving behind twirling gray smoke. "Now let's try lighting the candle wicks again. One by one." I close my eyes, and there it is again. That presence. Pain as I try to connect with the presence. Overwhelming pain. I lose my consciousness. 

* 

I open my eyes and everything looks very familiar. It looks like I am in my own bed. My body is burning up. I am well aware of what rages and burns through me, eager to be used. There are minds in the vicinity that I can sense, strands of thoughts that I can read. It's stronger than ever. 

My mother brings me a bowl of soup. The Grandmaster is present in the room as well. He looks concerned. "No lie down." he says as I try to sit up, "Your Energy has been dormant for too long". Well no. The problem is, it was never dormant. It was just compartmentalized. Now it fills my entire being so overwhelmingly that every waking moment and thought is devoted to containing it, there's no bandwidth for anything else. 

"If you are here as his uncle, then stop this foolishness. Let the sleeping devil sleep." says my mother. 

"You wouldn't give your own son another chance? You would relegate him to a life of mediocrity?" demands the Grandmaster. He is blind to my potency. How is he not sensing this? He kills me with his kindness but I never asked for this. He thinks of it as 'mediocrity', but a life away from forging and tempering the uncontainable within me sounds like utopia to me if I can ever manage it. My problem is, I cannot make the Energy dormant. Even when they think it is. 

I take the bowl of soup from my mother, and the weirdest thing happens as our fingers brush. There is an explosion inside my mind. Pieces of memory shatter like shards of broken glass. My mother and father are having a heated argument. They are yelling at each other. "Get out of my mind!" she screams at him, and he just smirks. There is hatred that is flowing through her veins. Intense, undiluted hatred for my father. The sound of breaking china snaps me out of the moment. I look at the shattered bowl of soup on the floor. "I am sorry" I tell her, but she walks out without a word. 

* 

I finally venture out of my room in the evening, and I see my mother in the front yard, watering the gaillardias. She raises her hand when I approach her. "I don't trust you" she says, "You were reading my mind today, weren't you?" 

"A memory, not your mind. I didn't consciously seek it." 

She laughs bitterly. "Oh, that reminds me of your father. He could control other minds too, like you. We were his personal puppets. Reading minds and imposing his will" 

"You hated him." 

"And I think you're just the same as he was" 

"I never asked for this. If I could pull all the Energy and bundle it away in some unreachable corner of my mind, I would gladly do so." 

"But you cannot. It's inseparable. It's who you are." 

"Why don't you go back to your family and live out the rest of your life in peace? Why do you stay?" 

She looks at me strangely. But her thoughts are so loud that it is practically screaming at me. For you. 

* 

I've lost track of time. I don't know for how long I've been meditating. My mind is so trained that it can hold a single thread of thought for an incredibly long time, it rarely strays. Focus. But I'm nowhere closer to taming the Energy than when I started. In fact, it feels like it's grown in strength. The Grandmaster enters my mind. "Seventy two hours straight" he tells me, "Your body grows weak. It is time to break out of your penance". 

I open my eyes. The Grandmaster sits in front of me. "Do you believe the Elder spirit still lingers?" I ask him. 

"Of course. The real question is, do you not?" 

"Have you ever communicated with him?" 

"No one has, in four hundred years. Not since he left behind his mortal body." 

Why? Why do you stay? How can this be your choice? Infinity beyond. Infinity within. Does it matter whether we go outwards or inwards? I sense the presence of the Elder spirit again. I don't reach out to it, like I did before. The pain is still fresh, and I don't want to go through it again. It is time. Time for what? My Energy swells up inside my mind like a tidal wave. No, no, no! As I try desperately to control it, I can hear the Grandmaster speak out loud. "What is going on? Open your eyes" he says, but I am unable to. There are no resources left to operate my body, I have to save my mind. "Open your eyes" urges the Grandmaster, "Or let me into your mind." 

If you let him in, it will kill him. He cannot dream of wielding this power. 

I cannot either. Help me. 

I am helping you. 

How do I stop this? 

Don't try to stop the Energy. Ride the wave. Or it will destroy you. 

My body feels like I'm on fire. Trying to control the Energy is like putting a paper wall around the Sun. I have no choice but to trust the Elder spirit, and let go. I can feel the Energy blast out of my body and reach a thousand minds. I am in all of them and I can read all their thoughts at once! My Energy cleanses their minds like the sea washing away scribbling on the sand, leaving behind warmth and glow in its wake. And then everything subsides just as quickly as the onslaught. The roar of a thousand minds all thinking at once stops. 

I try to open my eyes. I am floating in the air. All the objects around me are floating next to me, like there is no gravity. And as I open my eyes fully, we are all settling back on the ground softly. There is no more blinding white light. The Grandmaster is looking at me like he's seeing a ghost. As everything subsides, my body begins to shiver violently from that moment of epiphany with the realization that the Energy is really not restricted by the body. It can go everywhere. And be everything. And I pass out. 

* 

When I wake up, I am still in the Grandmaster's chamber. I don't need to open my eyes to sense the Council is present in the room. As are the masters. I can feel a wet towel on my forehead. 

I open my eyes. "He is awake" someone shouts. 

The Grandmaster sits next to me. "How are you feeling?" he asks. 

I can still feel my body shivering. "Weak" I say. I would've known what he's thinking even if I were not a mind reader. Can I survive the next onslaught? I highly doubt it. 

I've traveled around the kingdom, and seen everything there is to see. I've experienced everything there is to experience. At the end of a very long journey, I've realized I hide all the wonders of the universe within. 

The Elder spirit speaks to me once more. You've been locked in meditation for five hundred years! 

What is a mere five hundred years? There is eternity to come. 

Alone? 

Loneliness is being restricted inside a body. Now I'm everywhere. I experience everything. I am infinite. 

* 

The next time I wake up, my mother sits next to me. Her hand rests lightly on mine. How long have I been asleep? 

"You drift away for longer and longer" she says. Her words are tinged with melancholy. She knows my body is fighting a losing battle. I am not sure how to respond to anything but indifference from my mother. 

"I could feel your energy in me" she says, "It felt like the warm glow of fire in cold winter. It felt... peaceful." 

She looks flustered and red. It's tough for her to be telling me all this. I rest my other hand on hers. I'm glad I got to be the cause of something good in her life, even if just for a moment. 

"The hate and the bitterness. It's gone." she says. "All that is left in its wake is regret. The wasted years. The prejudice." 

"You had your reasons" 

"Whatever you hold within you, I've never felt anything like this before. Such unimaginable goodness and peace." Her eyes are filling up with tears. 

The Energy that fights and batters my body is a force of good. 

Energy is untouched, undiluted purity. 

And normal, mortal life? 

Life as you know it is a distraction steeped in ignorance. 

Should I stay? 

For the Energy that can be everywhere, what is the difference between staying and going? 

Suddenly, I am not afraid anymore. I understand. 

* 

I sit on the ocean shores, watching the waves swell and dip. I finally get it. Everything I want to be, I already am. I grab a fistful of sand and watch it slip through my fingers like a sieve and shower on the ground. Stay up.  The sand particles are now suspended in air, glistening in the sunlight like a shimmering sheet of gold, frozen in time and space. 

I look at the clouds, and I am the clouds floating through the sky in utter serenity, untouched and unspoiled. I look at the ocean, and I am the water, swelling up and crashing on the shore to shatter into a thousand miniscule droplets that would trickle back and join together once more to make the next wave. I am the wind that blows through the fields carrying with it the fragrance of jasmine and roses and sunflowers that reach out to caress it. I am nothing. I am everything together all at once. I am utterly free. At last. 

* 

"He is too young. He has not lived any life yet. Can't you do something?" asks my mother to the Grandmaster. They sit around my body. Around me. Now that this Energy is not contained to the mere confines of that thing that lies on the bed, I have to remind myself frequently that it is still me. For now. 

"The heart is still beating" says the Grandmaster, "But there is no consciousness". Oh. If only you knew how much consciousness there really is. I am aware of so much more. The journey has just begun. 

"I will not let them lock him away in some chamber" says my mother. "Let him be free in death, like he was in life." 

Do you want to tell them? You can communicate with the Grandmaster, you know. Do I want to tell them? How do I make them understand what this freedom really is? How do I put this bliss into words? How do I tell them that they can do what they want with the body, it doesn't matter anymore? Is this what happens to them after they die? Do they get to realize this way of being? 

If you don't realize it in life, you don't realize it in death. The energy takes on one body after another, for eternity and beyond. Till you break free. 

Is that what this is? Salvation? 

Are you staying? 

There are universes to explore. 

But you will come back. Because something of greater consequence lies within. 

My Energy sweeps through my mother. There is a faint smile on her lips. And then I soar upwards, towards the night sky lined with a million stars. I can hear distant weeping. "He is gone" the Grandmaster is saying. I've never been more alive. 