From: malavika sah <kafalpaako@gmail.com>
Date: 25 July 2015 at 22:08
Subject: SUBMISSION
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Bio: Dr. Malavika Chauhan is a PhD in the ecological sciences, and has been both, a Fulbright Scholar with the USGS, U.S.A. and a GEF (Global Environment Facility) Fellow at East Anglia University at the U.K. She has worked with WWF India, Wetlands International, and consulted for numerous agencies, including the World Bank, ADB, GOI, various state departments and other organizations. She is currently the Director of the Himmotthan Society, a development organization associated with the Tata Trusts, working in the Central Himalayan region of Northern India, and is based out of Dehradun, Uttarakhand. She has published extensively in peer reviewed academic journals, and is well known in the Himalayan and the Water resources sector of the country. 



*The Last Rays of the Sun* 

‘Sometimes’, she said, ‘I think I’ve lived my entire life in my head, alone, with no one for company. My husband, good man though he is, my lovers, my children, my friends.. they’ve been around, but none of them have been ‘with me’, you understand?’ I nodded, and leaned forward to dab her dry, bleeding lips with a wet cloth. ‘You should rest, don’t tire yourself’. But the old woman, exhausted with dying, yet wanted to talk. She spoke in a soft whisper of her father’s village, with its sweet mangoes and broad, brown river which flooded its banks and the village every monsoon. She spoke of the old priest at the riverside temple, the beautiful, dark skinned young labourers who came to work in the village every year from the adjoining region, the chatting groups of women washing clothes by the river, the fishing and the floods. 

‘I am fair you see’, she went on, ‘because my mother was from the east, from the mountains which are so far from here. My father’s village had always had very few girls, so there are these villages from where brides where brought. When I grew up I met this teacher, he was older to me, but so erudite. He came to my parents and asked to marry me, and they were more than happy. Who is not if a good man comes to ask for a daughter. We married and lived in the village a while, but then we moved, again and again from one place to another. Any place where he could learn something new, we went. He was forever incomplete, always searching. I dragged the children and our few things from village to village. The children, they suffered. No one place to call home. And so did I. Maybe that is way I became what I did.’ 

‘What did you become?’ I couldn’t resist asking. I shouldn’t have, she was so tired. The ashram karta had told me to just tend to her, and listen to her. ‘Hardened’, she said. I was tired, no women to talk to, no one to tell me how to bring up my children, how to do things. Oh, I was fine till suddenly one morning the sun seemed less bright, the winds too cold. I was so tired for such a long, long time. Then, one evening, my husband’s current teacher came to our one room hut. As I served them what little food we had, he looked straight up into my eyes and said, ‘thank you’. I had never met a man who said thank you. And definitely not like how he said it, looking straight into my face, with a smile! I was still young’, she smiled. ‘Had had four children but my sari was still tight around my waist..’. I laughed aloud at her smug tone. Her thin shoulders moved as she remembered. ‘and my bosom was high.’ 

He came to her hut one afternoon, when her husband had gone to the neighboring village for a talk, inquiring for him. She followed him as he left the hut, leaving behind a room full of children and things, to the small vale behind the village, into the tight copse of trees of which extended for miles around the village temple. There she came up to him, and he caught her up in a furious grip, making love to her without any inhibitions. As they lay a while under the trees, she’d said that there were snakes in this grove. He’d responded that even the nagas kept away from lovers who recognized each other across lives. 

She met him regularly for months, delighting in the warmth of the relationship. Enjoying the subtle gestures which only she would recognize, when he came occasionally to eat at their home. Till her husband decided suddenly one day to move. 

They moved on to a village in the foothills of the mountains where life was much more difficult. She had to walk miles to find and fetch water. Collecting wood for cooking meant clamoring up and down steep slopes. A false step would kill her. But in a way the labour was good, in that it kept her physically drained and let her sleep the nights in a death stupor. Her heart ached so much she didn’t know if she would live to see her children married. A physical ache, a sharp pain which would come and go as if it was hooked to a fishing rod which someone tugged at ever so often. 

But slowly, years passed, and again, she began to appreciate the fragrances of spring and cool evenings in the mountains. Her oldest, her beautiful daughter had grown, was intelligent and mature.  They married her to a handsome young man who worked at the ashram her husband studied at. Her older son too took a wife from the village, a plump, pretty girl with red cheeks and light hair. All three of her sons were engaged at the ashram, one working, two studying and helping. Those were the good family years she recalled, despite the several years she spent in a cloud of regret over her lost love. She remembered her first grandchild, a bouncy, chubby bundle of giggly girl. Oh so beautiful. ‘I think I loved my grandchildren far more than I did my children’ she said. 

And then they moved again. Higher up into the mountains. She told her husband that she was no spring chicken she recalled, to go bounding up the slopes. He joked, she said ‘you’re spryer than you were when you were 16, and much more beautiful’. She smiled. The ashram they moved to was much smaller, and much more stark than the last place where they had spent so long. But she was older, and they were on their own. There was less work, and the few people at the ashram lived in a much tighter community than at the last one. The few women worked together to gather fruits, firewood and water, cooked together, and talked in soft voices of their children, families left behind and joys and sorrows as they washed clothes and dishes in the nearby stream. Dark mountains loomed high on every side, not as beautiful but much more majestic, and somewhat fearsome. They seemed to reach up into the sky to block out the sun and the clouds, which they did. Long shadows kept the slopes and valley in the dark till late morning and from early evening onwards. It was so much colder and so less joyful. But it was in this shade that she met him. As he walked down the path from the upper mountains, with two others, she and the other women watched them while they chopped vegetables in the dull, afternoon sun. ‘The men looked like ants from where we watched, then grew to visible figures as they came down the track. I noticed him the minute they entered the camp, he was different. The rest, they wore ochre robes, had covered up themselves entirely against the cold.  He, he was bare chested in a white loin cloth. And all he had was a long beard and a wooden staff.’ She smiled to herself, and quietened down a bit. He had been she said, her soul itself. 

It was late evening, and a few last, warm rays of the sun slid into the room. She was very tired and her voice was little louder than a mumble. But she kept on talking, softly, reliving life one last time. 

He bent his head as he entered the room. Old and bent though he was, the door was smaller still. He stood by her as she lay on the pallet, breathing softly. I asked him who he was. He said he was her husband. He sat down slowly, painfully, by her side, and took the cloth from my hand. 