From: Avantika Mehta <avantikam@gmail.com>
Date: 15 August 2015 at 02:05
Subject: Submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com
Bio: Avantika Mehta is a writer and a lawyer. Currently, she covers legal news for Hindustan Times. She has previously reported on all things under the sun for Times of India, The Sunday Guardian, Tehelka Magazine, and Stringer.com (Aus.) Her fiction has been published by The Asia Literary Review. 


*The Flood* 

The phone rang shrill into my ear. It was lying next to my head, discarded and, incorrectly I had thought, in silent mode. I'd never liked answering phone calls; just the idea of calling someone seemed so demanding, so entitled. 

A name from back in the day flashed on the screen though. The picture — stolen by my phone from Facebook — must be recent, I thought. Abhishek looked older; had less hair and more belly fat. He didn’t look like the person with whom I’d spent hours huddled in my bathroom smoking pot, or even the crazy groom who rode a tinsled-up Kawasaki to his wedding instead of a usual white mare. 

The contrast between the picture I saw and the person I remembered made me realise he hasn’t demanded in a while, so he was overdue, and so I answered. 

“Mmm?” 

“Good, you picked up. Check your twitter.” 

Not everything had changed — Abhishek had lived for his Twitter before living on Twitter had become legit. 

"I’ve shared a link to Ijaz’s family’s coordinates in Srinagar. Retweet them. ASAP ok? He’s wild with worry. Hasn’t been able to get in touch with them since yesterday night.” 

Right, the flood in Kashmir, I remembered scanning the papers yesterday—it had been an exceptionally dry monsoon in Delhi though, so I hadn’t cared. 

But, a stray thought niggled at me -- Why hadn’t Ijaz called? 

Sure, we hadn’t spoken much since his marriage. Sure, I had ignored his call the last time he was in town. Sure, I hadn’t rung back either. That he’d used all those missed potentially good times as a reason to not reach out to me during a bad moment made me mad. 

If I were honest, I'd admit I was less pissed off and more panicked. In emergencies, you called friends for help; if he hadn’t, did that mean we were not friends anymore? 

“Of course I’ll re-tweet,” I replied. And I did –immediately. It was just one click. 

Abhishek and I spoke for another minute during which he told me all the things Ijaz should have: His mother and father had been stuck in the attic of their 3-floor-bungalow in Srinagar for days. By the time the army rescued them, the pair had run out of food; his father was injured, last he heard it wasn’t serious though. His sister was safe in Delhi, but his cousins hadn’t been heard from in days. 

I couldn’t get the image of Ijaz’s parents out of my mind. His father was a rounded 6-footer, and his mother a shy slouching woman who gave off the ‘still a bride’ vibes. 

Were they sitting on their haunches in that dank attic? How terrifying it must be to watch the river barreling through their dainty rose garden and cobblestone driveway. 

Checking my Twitter, I saw my retweet had gotten no further than my page. It became harder and harder to lie on my soft, springy mattress. The fresh conditioned breeze became stifling; the fur-lined blanket I used to guard against the air’s slight bite looked obscene, as it was. My friend was in need, and he hadn’t reached out to me. I should speak with him. 

His ringtone was a Hindi-movie song. “You are my hunny bunny,” crooned a melodious voice as my fingers rapidly tapped on my knee. 

“Hello…Yes?” He sounded exhausted. 

“Ijaz, it’s mm..me, Boppy,” I spoke quickly and so I stuttered. 

“I heard about your family; I’m so sorry.” 

“Yes, yes…” 

“Is there anything I can do to help?” 

“Well…” his hesitation was a dagger to my heart. So that’s why he hadn't informed me… he didn't believe I could help. 

“See, basically,” he started with that matter-of-fact tone of a person who had repeatedly been telling his tale of tragedy. 

“They were near Dal Lake. Last we heard my cousin Ali was with them, and the army had evacuated them to a hospital near the Lake. That’s what we knew yesterday.” 

He sighed. I remained quiet. So far, only I knew he was right: I couldn't help. 

“But the phones are down. I don’t know what’s going on there. Abba has a heart condition; you remember, don’t you? He might have run out of his medicine and then… ” 

“Wait, let me check with people I know in Srinagar,” I said, hoping to inject some light hope into the dark promise his voice makes. 

Immediately, I called another friend—a journalist who writes about the Army. “Karan!” I cried as he picked up. If there’s anyone in my circle who could help, who would know what’s going on, it would be him. 

“Listen, I know you’re probably getting calls left, right,” I began. 

“Yaar, Bops, give me their names. I’ll try. But I don’t know. The situation there is bad right now yaar. They’re throwing rocks at the army; Dal lake is flooding. No one knows what the fuck is going on. I can’t promise.” He blurted this out before I could say anymore –he sounded irritated at being asked like I was being entitled to try. 

“Their names are Nagma and Ahmed Khan; they were picked fr---” 

“Just text me the details, na. I’m on my way to the Army chief’s to figure out more.” He was curt, collected. He had friends in the Army; he had friends in Srinagar; he had friends who were looking for their families. But he had no family there, so he could afford calm. 

I turned my TV on. 

Images of water walls hurling themselves at mosques, pounding into white brick buildings, of shikaaras floating despondently rider-less on what used to be streets flooded my eyes and brain. Even on a screen, the angry power of overflowing water petrified me. 

“I’ve asked a friend to find out. Will let you know soon.” I texted Ijaz. I checked my Twitter one more time—no retweets. 

I knew neither Rahul nor Ijaz would call me back. I knew I wouldn't have anything to say to them, either. 

I suddenly remembered a night, a time that seemed like eons ago —2006, Curlys, Goa. Ijaz, Abhishek and I had dropped some acid. 

While both of them were taking it well, the drug hadn’t agreed with me. I’d become stressed, paranoid, and I’d felt like there was no one who would understand this because everyone around me was looked that they knew nothing other than the art of having fun. 

Ijaz had noticed; he’d reached out, held my hand, and taken me for a ride on his bike. As we drove through the Goan highway — away from Anjuna where we had been towards quieter pastures of Morjim. The moon was full, the breeze cool. The drive washed away my anxiety till I threw my head back and let out a long howl. It was just a short drive, but I was a different person when we stopped for a cigarette break fifteen minutes in. 

“I’m so sorry to take you away from the party,” I kept telling him. 

“You crazy or what? Don’t ever apologise to me. You’re one of us,” Ijaz had replied. 

But that was a different time. Like I said, eons ago. 

Today, alone, I lay back supine on my bed. The TV stayed on. The river continued to flood. The water was relentless and fierce in its destruction of all that had once seemed like legacy. 

(ends) 

 