From: Kanika Hope <kanikabahadur@yahoo.co.uk>
Date: 6 August 2015 at 00:19
Subject: Submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com 
Bio: I grew up in India and moved to London in 2000 where I now live. I work in the corporate world by day and write fiction (short stories, flash fiction and poetry) by night. The former pays the bills and the latter brings me joy. My writing draws on my childhood in Delhi and Mussoorie as well as on the rich and varied experiences during the last 15 years in multi-cultural London. I seek to write about the human experience in the context of a specific place and time, and many of my stories are set in the past.  For example, this submission, “The Tantrum”, is set in the early 1980’s in a small North Indian town. 

THE SUBMISSION: 

THE TANTRUM 

Lying between Richa and Ma on the bed, lulled by the whirr of the cooler fitted in the window and the drone of the three-pronged ceiling fan above, Charu dreamed of her birthday next week and the present she would buy with the twenty rupees that her Nana had already sent in the post. She knew she would make a beeline for Raman Book Depot, the only bookshop in town selling children’s books in English. Of course, it had to be an Enid Blyton. The question was whether to go for a Fatty book in the Five Find-Outer series or for a Malory Towers. 

Enid Blyton had taken over her life when she acquired her first Noddy at six. Two years on, she loved her more than ever. Although she’d never read anyone else, it didn’t feel like that because there were so many different types, to suit every taste. Ashu, her best friend, being a boy, hated the girlie boarding school stories but loved the adventures and the mysteries. 

Charu couldn’t wait to curl up in Baba’s armchair with her new book and an iced Campa Cola. Oh, what a perfect birthday treat that would be! 

Charu’s pleasurable day-dreaming was interrupted by the clattering sound of the front-gate opening, followed by the clang of the doorbell. Ma, who had been properly asleep, got up groggily to open the door. It was the middle of a scorching June afternoon; the outside temperature was close to forty-five degrees. It was not a time to be out and about.  Charu wondered who it could be. 

It was Meena Aunty, Ashu’s mother, from the house adjoining theirs. She was crying. Her tears made her prematurely wrinkled face look even more lined. Her hair had started to go white although she was not yet forty. She sat down and before Ma could ask what the matter was, she blurted out, “It’s Binny. She locked herself in her bedroom the day before yesterday and has been in there since. She hasn’t eaten a thing. I’ve begged her and begged her but she just won’t open the door. I had to come… I’m going mad with worry.” 

Charu had followed Ma to the drawing room door and now hovered there, straining to hear what was going on with Binny, Ashu’s older sister. Ma, without turning around, ordered Charu to fetch some orange squash for Aunty. With plenty of ice, she said. 

Ma asked Meena Aunty, “What about Binny’s father? What does Mr Kapoor have to say?” 

“He’s very, very angry! You see, they had a big fight. That’s why she locked herself in. He’s been yelling at the door since she went in. He’s threatened to cut off her pocket money; he’s sworn he won’t let her sign up to that drawing course she’s been wanting to join. But there’s been no response from the bedroom, just pin-drop silence. 

"We can’t let her carry on this hunger-strike! The only option is to pay a rickshaw-walla to break open the door. But think of what everyone will say! We’ll be the talk of the town!” 

Fresh tears ensued.  Ma could see how much it cost Meena Aunty to come to her. Nobody wants to wash their dirty linen in public. Of course, confiding in next-door neighbours was infinitely preferable to letting the rickshaw-wallas know. All would be lost once word got round to the rickshaw-wallas on the street. They, along with the maids and the street-sweepers, constituted the neighbourhood grapevine. Each day, this motley group collected, embellished and disseminated the latest gossip on every family in the block of six streets comprising the neighbourhood. 

In the hot summer afternoons, the various grapevine participants parked themselves just outside Charu’s front wall to rest under the shade of their enormous Gulmohar. The tree was a bone of contention for Kapoor Uncle, Meena Aunty’s cantankerous husband and Ashu’s father. He complained at every opportunity about the flame-coloured blossoms that fell across the boundary wall into his yard. Charu’s Baba and Ma chose to ignore him. It was never a good idea to quarrel with immediate neighbours, however unreasonable they were. 

And Kapoor Uncle was certainly that. He was not at all like Charu’s easy-going, kind-hearted Baba. Uncle’s fearsome temper, which Ma said, was “always sitting at the tip of his nose,” was legendary in the neighbourhood. He picked fights with everyone –maids, tradesmen, local shopkeepers, neighbours.  Most of these fights were about money. He hated spending any and believed that everyone was out to fleece him given half the chance. 

His own family bore the brunt of his temper – he relentlessly bullied Meena Aunty, Binny and even his youngest, Ashu, and ruled them with an iron hand. He taught at the University which, he felt, made him superior to everyone else. Charu’s family was the only one he condescended to mix with occasionally. They were ‘worth it’ because Charu’s Baba was in a good job and her Ma taught in a school. 

Ma said reassuringly to Meena Aunty, “Let me wake up Kishore. He and I will come over and try and talk to Binny.” Kishore, Charu’s uncle, was visiting from Bombay where he had gone to study last year. Binny, Ma knew, looked up to Kishore because he was bright and good-looking and had many friends. 

*** 

Charu returned to the darkened bedroom after Ma and Kishore Kaka left with Aunty. The ancient water cooler was still blowing musk-scented air around the room. She shook her sister Richa awake and gave her the news. Richa, two years older than Charu, would sometimes join in with Charu and Ashu and the gang of kids from the neighbourhood they hung out with most evenings. Other times, she would act all grown up and refuse to accept the authority of Ashu, who was otherwise the undisputed leader of the gang. 

This juicy business of Binny’s tantrum was enough to make Richa venture out with Charu to the common boundary wall to see if they could hear anything from Binny’s room and to check if Ashu was around. There was no question of climbing the wall at this hour – the bricks would be so hot they’d burn their bums! 

All was quiet; Binny’s window had the curtains drawn. The heat was unbearable and they could feel the ‘loo’, the searing wind that blew this time of year. 

Richa said, “You know, you can die if you stay out in the ‘loo’ long enough. We should go in.” 

Just then, Ashu’s tousled head appeared over the wall. He said the secret password, “Ice-lolly” for no one was allowed to talk across the wall unless they had the password. Each of them in turn had to come up with a new password every week. It had to be written on a little slip of paper which was hidden under the third flowerpot on the wall. 

Bursting with excitement, Charu asked, “What happened, Ashu? Why has Binny Didi locked herself in? And why on earth didn’t you say a word yesterday?” 

“Why should I? It’s none of your business!” 

“Oh come on! Don’t act funny! We’ve always shared our secrets,” said Charu, hurt. 

Ashu thought for a moment in that calculating way of his, and then said to Charu, “Okay! I promise I’ll tell you everything, when we meet later in the evening. But only if you give me your newest Enid Blyton, the one you’ll buy with your birthday money next week.” 

Charu felt angry. It was mean of Ashu to ask for her birthday present like that, just because he knew she was dying to find out about Binny. She reluctantly agreed but secretly decided she would buy the Malory Towers, just to serve him right! 

Charu couldn’t help wondering about Ashu. He was behaving more and more weirdly these days. Take that Crocodile-Crocodile game he’d introduced to Charu and their friends the day before, for instance. She’d only realized afterwards, when everyone had left, what that had been all about. Ashu had won every round, because of the psychedelic shirt he got last Diwali, the one Meena Aunty had stitched in a star-shaped patchwork pattern from about thirty leftover pieces of cloth, the one that had more colours than they knew to count. He knew with this shirt, he was guaranteed to win, whoever the crocodile was and however obscure the colour they chose, because if you had that many colours, you could cross the river and never have to be tagged. 

Charu was slowly coming to grips with the fact that Ashu’s life increasingly revolved around furthering the interests of one person and that person was Ashu. All his suggestions were expressly designed to make himself look good, at least better than any of his friends, whether it was in a game or a barter or schoolwork. It was only much later, when she was properly grown up, that Charu fully understood why he was like that.  All that bravado was a façade to hide what he was like in his own home. 

*** 

Ma came back after about half an hour and headed straight for the kitchen. Charu was full of questions: Had Binny opened the door? What did Uncle say – was he very angry? Had Binny fallen sick, from starvation? 

Ma said, “Don’t be silly, she’s fine.” 

“But you always say we’ll fall sick if we don’t drink our milk every night! And Binny Didi hasn’t eaten anything for two days!” 

“This is a grown-up matter and children have no business with it. Now, let me get on with cooking. How about you drop these countless questions and help me instead? Can you make a jug of nimbu-pani? Properly with crushed ice, lots of sugar and a pinch of salt, please. Make sure you remove all the seeds from the lemons.” 

There was nothing for it but to do as she was told. Ma wouldn’t say a word more. She started frying onions and potatoes. When she broke three eggs into a bowl, Charu realised she was making her special masala omelette. Soon, Ma left for the Kapoors’ house carrying a tray with the omelette, two buttered toasts and a glass of iced nimbu-pani. 

*** 

Charu and Richa waited for Ashu in the backyard. The papaya trees at the far end were fat with fruit tied up in brown sack cloth to keep off the greedy sparrows. It was still blisteringly hot but at least the ‘loo’ had subsided a bit and they were in the shadow of the house. The two sisters whiled away the time, racing each other amongst the heavenly-smelling saris and bed-sheets drying on the blue nylon washing lines running criss-cross across the yard. Their home-made cotton frocks were soon soaking with sweat. 

Charu said to Richa, “Kapoor Uncle must be furious! You think he’ll spank Binny Didi when she comes out?” 

“He’s always scolding her anyway. It won’t make much difference. I wonder what they quarrelled about.” 

“Could it be the school trip to Nainital? Ashu said he didn’t her go because he thought it was a waste of money. He didn’t even let her have a birthday party this year – she was fifteen last month.” 

“Just as well, for she has hardly any friends. My friend Mona told me all about it; her sister is in Binny’s class. She says Binny’s jealous of everyone who does better than her and looks down on the rest.” 

“Really?” said Charu, surprised. 

“I don’t like her and her black moods. I think she’s just like her father. Look at the way she ignores us, treats us like babies, when we’re only a few years younger. She keeps listening to those Abba cassettes in her room and won’t let any of us join her.!” 

“Shhhh. Richa. What if Ashu hears you? She’s his sister, after all!” 

“I didn’t tell you that last week, that when Ma sent me to their house with Nana’s mangoes, she was speaking so rudely to her mother. And Meena Aunty didn’t scold her at all. If we spoke to Ma like that, we’d get a tight slap each!” 

Charu asked, “What did she say to Meena Aunty?” 

“She was going on about how hateful Aunty’s cooking was.” 

“Oh, but we all know that. Doesn’t Ashu love to eat with us, to escape her cooking? And then asks me over for lunch in return? But I can’t bear Aunty’s food, even her dal-chawal, so I’m always putting him off. Why did she never learn to cook, Richa?” 

“Ma says it’s not her fault. I overheard her telling Baba that Uncle doesn’t give her enough money for proper groceries so she has to make do with the stalest vegetables and masalas.” 

Every morning, they woke up to the cries of the subziwallas pushing their carts piled high with  vegetables – onions, potatoes, gourds, lady’s fingers, brinjals, cucumbers. Meena Aunty spent hours haggling with them unlike their Ma who never bothered. 

Richa went on, “If they all go on and on about how bad her food is, it must make it worse. I know that whenever my art teacher says I’m bad, I mess up my drawing even more.” 

Charu said loyally, “Well, Ashu never says a word against his mother. He’s not like his father and sister.” 

They shut up as soon as they heard the words, “Ice-lolly” from behind the wall and Ashu appeared. All three huddled under the papaya trees to hear Ashu tell the story behind Binny’s tantrum. 

*** 

Binny (short for Bindiya, her proper name, and one she loathed) had spent two sleepless nights and all of the previous day in her bedroom. She was weak with hunger. The packet of biscuits in her desk drawer was long gone. She had been drinking tepid tap water from the sink in the attached bathroom. She knew she would start to feel dizzy soon. 

She was still seething with anger. The night before last, he had finally done what he had threatened for years – he had hit her mother. Instead of merely screaming at her, which he did all the time, this time he had slapped her hard on the arm. Her mother had cried out in pain. 

Dinner had been a sorry affair. That idiot brother of hers, Ashu, had cowered in silence as usual. Most times when their parents quarrelled, or rather their father shouted and their mother cried, Ashu would be reduced to a quivering mass of terror while she herself would be boiling with rage. 

Binny had sat at the dining table fuming, the food on her plate untouched. Their father, after his burst of temper, had sat there, reading the newspaper while he ate.  Their mother, as always, had served hot chapattis from the kitchen. Binny couldn’t for the life of her understand how she could bear to serve him. 

Before she could stop herself, Binny had shouted at him. She had called him an animal, and had rushed to her room and locked the door before he could come charging after her. Binny didn’t know why she’d done that.  She despised her mother. 

Her father had been so angry today because the rajma her mother had packed for his lunch had been virtually inedible. It had been doubly embarrassing when a colleague of his had happened to come by and taste it. Apart from being the world’s worst cook, her mother was useless at everything else as well. She dressed dowdily, she made the most awful clothes for them, and most embarrassing of all, she couldn’t even string a single sentence in English together. Binny was too ashamed of her to ever think of bringing any of her classmates home. 

How she hated them both. What a ridiculous couple they made – she, thin and gaunt with her haggard face and white hair, and he, short and plump, with his dyed jet-black hair. She couldn’t wait to be eighteen – another three years and she would run away. It would serve them both right. 

Her thoughts were interrupted by a knock on her door. She was preparing to ignore it when she realized it wasn’t either of her parents but Charu’s mother from next door. 

Charu’s Ma spoke in her gentlest voice, “We know you’re angry with your mother and father. But you’re not angry with us, are you? Kishore is here from Bombay and he would like to talk to you.” 

She and Kishore had gone straight to Binny’s door, ignoring her father who sat simmering in the drawing room, livid with his wife for having defied him and fetched the neighbours. He was nursing his wounded pride for not being able to handle his teenage daughter himself. 

“My father is an animal!” was the first thing Binny said when she opened the door. Her hair was dishevelled, her eyes red and swollen and her cheeks streaked with tears. Sobbing loudly, she told them her side of the story. 

Ma and Kishore sat on her bed, letting her get it out of her system. The bitterness with which Binny spoke, shocked them both. 

After a while, Charu’s Ma returned home to prepare some food for the starving girl while Kishore stayed on to keep her company. 

*** 

Charu buried her face in the folds of Ma’s sari. She said, “Ma, Baba would never beat you, would he?” 

“What has Ashu been telling you?” 

“He told us the whole story. We know why Binny Didi threw a tantrum!” 

Ma holding her close, said, “Charu, you know your Baba, don’t you? He’s the kindest, gentlest of men. He couldn’t be more different from Uncle. Have you ever heard him even raise his voice, let alone hit anyone?!” 

“Yes, but…what if…” 

Ma continued, “Besides, you should know I would never stand it. I am not like Meena Aunty.” 

“What do you mean? That you cook so well?” 

“No, you silly thing! Unlike me, Meena Aunty doesn’t work and has no money of her own. Then, she has no support from her family. Uncle doesn’t let her have anything to do with them – he says they are shopkeepers from Saharanpur, which they aren’t, by the way. And she’s been bullied for so many years she’s lost all confidence. It’s like if someone keeps telling you you’re bad, you end up believing you are bad.” 

“Richa was saying that when her art teacher says she is bad, her painting becomes even worse.” 

“Exactly, beta.” 

“Ma, why is Uncle like that?” 

“Who is to say? It’s not our business to understand him or to change him. All I can do is help Aunty when she’s in trouble. And you and Richa can help by being nice not only to Ashu, who is your friend, but also by being kind to Binny when you can. I’ve heard you two speak badly of her. There are good reasons for why she is the way she is. Try and put yourself in her shoes and walk about in them before you judge her.” 

Charu felt immediately ashamed. She and Richa had spent the afternoon saying bad things about Binny. But above all, she felt sorry for her friend. Poor Ashu had started crying when he came to the bit about his father hitting his mother. She would not begrudge him her birthday present. She would buy the Five Find-Outer mystery that she knew he would like. 

Ma finished, “You know, Binny may have saved her mother by throwing this tantrum. Uncle won’t dare to do it again. He knows the entire neighbourhood will know if he does. So some good may have come out of all this after all.” 

Charu sent up a little prayer to thank God she had not been born in the house next door. She went outdoors to swing on the gate, as she always did, when it was time for her Baba to come home. 

*** 