From: Varsha Pillai <varshuu@gmail.com>
Date: 7 September 2015 at 14:31
Subject: SUBMISSION
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com
Bio: Varsha Pillai has over a decade experience in the world of communication. First as a TV news journalist at reputed news organizations like ANI-Reuters and CNN-IBN, she reported, edited and produced shows on different beats including business, entertainment and news features. One of her half hour shows as a reporter won the prestigious Ramnath Goenka award in 2007. One of her short fiction stories, titled “Party” won the gold prize in 2008 and was published in the short stories book called, “Revenge Ink's Anthology of Real Indian Writing. She took a break from the frenzied world of television reporting and dabbled in a bit of wall painting, gardening and yoga. She is currently engaged with a non-profit organization and lives with her husband and baby girl in the city of Bangalore, even as she awaits the completion of her first full-length novel. 

*Dada’s Malady* 

Crouching behind the grand old dressing table was quite the task. The dressing table had a huge mirror that seemed to almost touch the fan but did not. Raja spotted the small beautiful spider crawl behind it. The space between the dressing table and the wall was just enough to permit him to seek out the spider. There was no light. Perhaps he should have taken his torch light with him. The torch was a made in china model, a red coloured torch that Raja loved to carry around the house. Everything seemed so pink; he was wearing the rose tinted goggles that his Baba had gifted him when he returned from one of his trips to Mumbai. Just as he was reaching behind the mirror to locate the spider, he heard a click. 

He saw Shankar dada scurrying outside Dida’s room. A devilish grin lingered on his face. “He was up to something interesting” Raja thought. He called out “Dada”. But his elder brother was already heading outside the house. “Hmmm…I should follow him. What was it called in those English movies …yes do a ‘stake-out’ on Dada”. And slowly Raja walked ten steps behind Shankar. Mr Sherlock Holmes would have been proud of him. Shankar walked to the local grocery store. The ‘*kirana*’ store, a word his Baba thought too ‘provincial’-a word Raja did not understand, Dada later explained that ‘provincial’ meant ‘*ghaati*’ in Marathi and there was no English equivalent to that word. 

Raja also wanted to know the meaning of the word ‘incompatible’. Dada said that Ma and Baba had fights because they were ‘incompatible’ all Raja wanted was that this ‘incompatible’ should be reduced somehow and Ma and Baba should not fight anymore.  Ever since that party, Baba would not have dinner at home. He left early for work. Ma explained that Baba was working hard for his ‘promotion’. Dada also mentioned that Ma had called Dida from Kolkata, to ‘ensure’ that Baba would not think of a ‘divorce’. Raja liked the word ‘ensure’. ‘Divorce’ now that word he was not too sure! Dada said that it would mean that Baba and Ma would live separately and Dada and Raja would have to choose whoever they wished to lived with! Raja involuntarily shivered…it would be horrible if that ‘divorce’ thing happened. Thank God…at least now for Dida’s sake there were no more fights. 

Shankar was busy ogling at some ball-point pens at the *kirana* store and was asking Prashant Uncle, the owner of Prashant *Kirana* Stores to show more pens. When Prashant Uncle wasn’t looking, Shankar took one pen and slowly put it in his pocket. Shocked, Raja wondered why Dada was stealing… and that too pens! Somewhere the picture of Shankar Dada as an intelligent, smart and understanding elder brother took a beating. Raja was thinking, “why dada is a thief…and that too someone really cheap…not even one of those smart thieves”. Standing near the *kirana* store, he wished his elder brother would just pocket whatever he wanted and leave soon, without having to face the shame of being caught. He heard Shankar asking Prashant uncle to show him another set of gel ball point pens and no sooner had Uncle turned towards the shelves behind him, Shankar pocketed one of those fancy Parker ones and just as he was about to put them in his pocket, when Prashant Uncle, with a loud “*Aye*!” caught Shankar’s wrist. It had all happened very quickly, first Shankar yelped in pain, and then with downcast eyes, he mumbled a low “Sorry” and emptied his pockets. 

Raja cringed and felt bad. His Dada had a look of a lost little boy. Prashant Uncle without a doubt was giving Dada a ‘lecture’. Now lecture was a word he understood, Dada used it often on Ma, whenever she would tell him to study and not waste time. He was after all in the tenth grade. He would say “Ma, don’t lecture me. I’m grown up now!” Raja wondered if Prashant Uncle would complain to Baba, then surely his brother would be subjected to some scolding. Only once before he had seen his father beat Dada when his brother had asked Baba why Minti *Mashi* called Baba so often. After that there was a ‘cold war’ between Dada and Baba, they never talked.  Cold war meant the two sides did not feel any warmth towards each other, Dada had later on explained. 

Raja ran home. He wanted to tell Ma about the whole stealing episode. But then he knew that Ma would get worried and would start crying. So he decided to maintain the ‘status quo’ another word that Dada had taught him which meant to keep things the way they are. Dada had said that Ma and Baba were doing ‘status quo’ all for Dida’s sake. So Raja thought that ‘status quo’ was not such a bad thing after all. After an hour, the doorbell rang, Dada entered and went straight to his room, his face looked swollen and his eyes were red. Raja felt like crying himself. Should he go to Dada and ask if Prashant Uncle hit him or worse had complained to Baba? 

Raja knocked and heard his brother *‘Ki holo?*’ He heard a grunt, assuming it to be a consent, Raja ventured inside his brother’s room. The huge poster that read “The wall” that hung over Dada’s bed had come undone. Shankar was sitting on his bed looking outside the window with his back facing Raja. He heard Dada mumble something. Dada turned towards Raja, a small tear fell off. ‘I’m a klepto…A bloody kleptomaniac’ Raja stared at him, puzzled. ‘*Maaney’*? Shankar smiled through his tears, his brother, the ever curious younger brother. “*Maaney* I have a disease. I suffer from Kleptomania.” “*Accha* Dada, do I also have kelpto??”  Shankar pulled Raja towards him and hugged him. “Aarey idiot…I said Kleptomania…not kelpto…” Raja knew everything was ok, because whenever Dada smiled and called him an idiot especially after a hug…it meant things had become normal. But he was still worried. “What is that disease you have’? He asked. “Hmmm…it’s something which makes me steal things from people. Things I don’t need but just steal because I just feel like!” 

Raja had known all along, his hero was suffering from something. He was not a stupid common pen thief. A relieved Raja hugged his brother. He wondered if Sherlock Holmes knew how to solve such kelpto type problems… 

