From: debojit dutta <debojit.dutt@gmail.com>
Date: 1 June 2015 at 18:25
Subject: Submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com
Bio: I am Debojit Dutta, a writer based in New Delhi, India, from where I run a tiny webzine called Antiserious. My writings have previously appeared in places like the Motherland magazine, Kindle magazine, Himal Southasian and Deadbeats Literary Blog. 


*The Man Who Murdered Sachin Tendulkar *

*by Debojit Dutta* 

It was 2011, India had just won the cricket World Cup after a gap of 28 years. People were out on the streets celebrating, intoxicated by the glory a generation had begun to think was not theirs to be. Eight years ago, it almost happened then slipped away. But not this time. 

The big cities had their way of celebrating. Mumbai went down to the Marine Drive, Delhi as always reached its place of exhibition—the India Gate. In Banchal, a small town in northeast India, we celebrated in a more or less traditional way. Going out and burning firecrackers that we save every Diwali in anticipation of such events. There was a minor scuffle in the Muslim neighbourhood where a bunch of hoodlums assuming that it was Pakistan that India were playing in the final had burned down a poster of Wasim Akram. But the police acted with alacrity and arrested most of the teenagers, who later confessed they weren’t too sure about the particular World Cup because they had not been watching cricket since Indo-Pak matches became a rarity, so had no clue that Wasim Akram had long since hung up his boots. 

But that scuffle even though it grabbed a few local newspaper headlines—one or two claiming it to be a communal riot—wasn’t unusual. Something of that kind would happen every now and then. Strange for me, perhaps because of my personal association, was the death of Pulokit Purkayastha, or PP as he was fondly called. Hanging by a noose to the peepal tree outside his house, a very unusual death. Why did PP die? 

*** PP was a boy of 13 when the local news agencies took notice of him. He had just won a poetry competition held by Tantra Arts Fund Trust and as part of the deal was invited to Delhi for a workshop. He was in seventh standard then and his mother was a little sceptical about allowing him to go to the land about which a number of stories heard from neighbours had made it inhospitable in her head. 

It took some effort from PP to convince her. “He would walk after me with a copy of his poems and follow me to the kitchen, wash basin, and everywhere I would go.” This went on for some time and then when it did not help, PP took the Gandhian route. He gave up food for a whole day. “Nothing,” recollects his uncle, “Not even his favourite aam muri (mango and puffed rice) could convince him to eat. Such was his resilience.” 

So a week later just before PP’s going to Delhi when the news reached the papers that bit about “resilience” was mentioned, thrice in a 500-word report. 

PP’s poetry was highly appreciated by the Delhi poets, one famous name going as far as offering to publish him in a book of New Writing, the kind that usually includes very old and big people. PP’s poem “Daffodil in Banchal”, seen as a tribute to William Wordsworth, was going to be a part of the anthology. 

He called up home via Misra uncle, the next door neighbour and only owner of a telephone in their lane. “I... I, Pappu. Ma, I am getting famous here. Becoming big person," and then he had no more money to pay the P.C.O guy who without looking at him asked, "Naukri lag gayi kya?” In his head PP thought up an office, a long row of seats where 10-15 people sat and exchanged paan and laughter in between tapping on the wooden tables and slow, continuous noise of the fans that made the afternoons seem even longer then they were. He imagined a lady in a blue sari with white dotted patterns and black blouse to go with it and wondered what she might be thinking while staring at the register before her, while it was clear that her mind was somewhere else as showed the pencil stuck in her mouth, which he knew was often held tight between her teeth because he had once picked it up in his hand during the lunch hour when no one was looking and had wondered putting it in his mouth if it would take him to where the lady goes every afternoon—saliva, saliva, through her digestive tract to where she thinks from, if saliva could travel in that way is something he was never taught and later, as you will find out, he would never know. “Nahi. Naukri toh karni hi nahi hai.” (No. I don't want to get an employment.) 

“Like ever?” 

“Like ever.” 

PP returned after his four week stay. His mother noticed a change in his behaviour. 

“It is like he was another person only. So quiet. 'PP, PP!' You call, and no response. Not even to his friends.” 

That wasn't entirely true, says Biren, who was one of his best friends in school. 

“He wasn't ever the kind to make too much noise. He wasn't even noticeable in class. I remember one day these girls came up to us and asked PP if he was a new admission. That, after spending 9 hours in this school.” 

But like PP's mom, Biren does agree that there was a change in his behaviour if not that drastically overnight. 

“He stopped playing with us. He was always a very enthusiastic cricketer but he kind of just gave it up. Stopped even talking about the game.” 

Atul, a neighbour and playmate of his, agrees. 

“One day, he just came up to me and said, ‘Atul da, take these trump cards of mine. I don't want them anymore.’ I was shocked and honoured both at the same time. I could not believe my eyes. Years of eating bubble gums that tasted like rubber just for those cards and now all gone. Strange emotions, two at the same time... last happened when this girl in high school dumped me. No, I wasn't honoured then,” Atul chuckles. 

After two more months he told his mother that he did not want to take his studies beyond the 12th standard if it meant going to big cities and becoming an engineer. His mother was shocked and upset—two emotions at the same time—but eventually saw some sense and agreed to “let him ruin his life here.” 

So cricket gone, you would think. Engineering gone. Socializing gone. What was left was poetry but no awards. 

*** 

Two years later it was time for the Wills World Cup. It was hosted in India and so, naturally, we were all very excited. Then there were all these new commercials. Cola giants like Coke and Pepsi got into their usual tug-of-war and we enjoyed watching cricketers like Shane Warne, Dominic Cork try to speak Hindi to look like one of us. 

There were rumours that Warne was so impressed with Hindi now that he wants to act in a Bollywood movie, and Subhash Ghai already has a role for him opposite Madhuri Dixit. 

There were also rumours that Banchal's Aminapara field would be hosting a match between India and Pakistan, but although that did not happen, Eden Gardens in Kolkata was hosting the semi-final. I, a nine-year old then, persisted with my father to take me to the game. He told me Eden Gardens was a very small stadium and matches there could never go beyond ten overs a side because the players got furious after a while with the poor organizing. The truth was that he did not have the money for the tickets. But he did promise me the Australia-South Africa match that was to happen in Guwahati soon after the World Cup. But in trying to convince me against Kolkata, my parents had to involve the neighbours who would validate their version of the stadium. Among the neighbours was Rekha aunty, PP's mother, and when through her the news reached PP, he landed a tight slap on my right cheek. It terrified everyone. I did not utter World Cup ever again in front of him, and I don't know anyone else who did. 

But we did talk about Sachin Tendulkar who took on the world like no Indian batsman before him had. He dominated the Australians and Sri Lankans alike, scored hundreds and ended up with more runs than anyone else in the tournament. 

So crazy we were about Sachin that in the field where we played cricket we started keeping a scorecard where against his name after every match we would write down the score he had made: like 137 off 137 balls vs Sri Lanka, 1996. After two matches though, something strange started happening. Every time we would scribble the numbers diligently, someone would wipe them out and write the same thing in block letters again and again: KAPIL DEV 176 N.O VS ZIMBABWE, 1987. We had no clue what was happening, but the older boys nodded a knowing nod. 

*** 

Next year, PP moved out of the city. That was the last I saw of him. A blue duffel bag hanging from his shoulders, dark denims, a yellow T-shirt and white canvas shoes that he used to wear on sports days in school. I saw him from behind. After what he did to me, I did not want to see his face. 

Later, I was told that he had moved to his grandmother's, to a nondescript town nearby. A town that had more gutters than there were people. A town that howled at night and slept throughout the day. A town that stank of a time it was trying to hold on to and in doing so had got its guts rotten, so when it belched and when it burped the tourists had to run with their face covered. 

Thereafter, there were only rumours about PP. He wasn't remembered as much as he was reminded of. We heard how he had become a drug dealer and had gone to a big city and was a big short criminal now. We heard that he had, like we saw in movies, saved a rich girl from a bunch of eve-teasers and now had her heart and her money. 

However, in 1998 a more interesting talk started doing the rounds. While we enjoyed listening to that story, we thought it too bizarre to be true. Eventually, perhaps due to its repetitive nature, the local newspapers started carrying reports around it. We ignored that too, but with a sense of pride having heard it before it reached the media. But then one of the papers featured a photo of PP, now with stubble and wearing the same yellow shirt that he was wearning the day he left. 

The *Yugantar Times* that published the report under the headline “Mad Man Claims to have Killed the Master Blaster”, wrote in descriptive sentences how PP looked on the day he forcefully surrendered to the police, what he was wearing, what he was smelling of, and five quotes by PP who desperately wanted to get locked up. 

“He had bloodshot eyes when he reached the police... was holding a .44 caliber unlicensed revolver, and stood on his trembling legs as he constantly murmured, ‘I have him. I have killed him.’” 

The attending cop admitted he was too terrified to ignore his complaint, although he knew very well that it made no sense because he had seen Sachin murder the Australian bowlers on the field just the night before, hitting the second of his consecutive centuries. Moreover, the matches were in Sharjah and it was too far for a pauper like PP. 

But PP insisted that it happened right here in Banchal where he had come for a visit. He was just done watching the highlight of a cricket game where Mohammad Azharuddin and Kapil Dev had combined to see India home. It made no sense, but as PP would put it, he had bought the revolver specifically for this purpose. He said he had to convince himself for three months before he finally did it. But this was much needed. So in the middle of the night after Tendulkar had hit the first hundred against Australia and the whole of Banchal was celebrating he could not take it anymore. He knew where he would find his target, he knew his target was four inches shorter than he was, so he measured in his head from what distance he would have to shoot, so he caught him unaware like a Wasim Akram delivery, fired one, two and three bullets, the last one point blank, as he saw his target resist and fumble, resist and fumble and fall. 

When the cops asked him why he decided to come and surrender for a pre-planned crime, PP replied saying it wasn't as satisfactory as he thought it would be. He was sleepless, breathless and the fumbling, falling image of Tendulkar kept coming back to him, regardless of if his eyes were open or closed. He had sympathies for the cricketer's wife, they had just gotten married. But there was no going back. At least, he should be punished. 

The next morning, as the *YT* reported, PP was sent to a mental asylum, then after a few months moved surreptitiously to Banchal on his parents' wish. But we never came to know where he lived. 

There were rumours again that he has been locked inside a room the size of a matchbox, that he now looked like a chimpanzee, that he now shat and ate at the same place. The only rumour that allowed PP to speak is the one where he would repeat, breathlessly, "I have killed Sachin Tendulkar. I have murdered Sachin Tendulkar." 

