From: shehjaar <shehjaar@gmail.com>
Date: 11 June 2015 at 00:24
Subject: SUBMISSION
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>

*Main Story* 

*The forbidden island* 

*Ashok Patwari* 

Mohammad Ahmed found a gap between the boats and quickly moved towards the jetty.  The zigzag gaps between the boats interestingly led to the specific spot allotted to his motor boat. All other boats around him were also exhibiting a lot of enthusiasm with the culmination of another successful day at the sea. For the last couple of days, every fisherman in Malé thanked Allah for His blessings and a high yield of fish, crabs and lobsters every day. The euphoric mood of the fishermen turned the environment into a noisy atmosphere filled with an intense fishy smell like of a fish market. Of course it looked like a fish market in a way, though not in a strict sense. It certainly was that part of harbor which had a separate jetty for fishermen. Ahmed was equally jovial all these days, practically dancing away from the boat while his father Mohammad Karim’s eyes broadened to see the boat filled with the huge catch day after day. 

But Ahmed appeared to be in a different state of mind today! 

Karim was rather surprised to see a quiet Ahmed coming towards the bank and then without a change in his expression, he started tying the boat to the huge nails fixed in the wall. Ahmed was neither jumping nor showing any expression of happiness, even though everybody else did. Without asking him any questions, when Karim looked inside the boat, he was shocked to see the boat was half empty. ‘What has happened today?’ Karim asked himself. ‘How is it that Ahmed could not fill his boat when everybody did? Is it that he did not fish at all in the afternoon?’ Karim was about to ask him this question, but knowing Ahmed’s deep sense of responsibility and sensitive nature, he preferred not to. A reduction by almost half in the  catch – that  too during the peak season when everybody else was rejoicing with his own – made him sad, but he  only asked, *“*Ahmed, are you okay? Any problem?” 

“I am okay father!” came a brief answer, and while handing over the key of the motor boat, Ahmed said, “I want to take a stroll father. Please take care of the boat.” 

Karim was certain that something was wrong with Ahmed but he did not ask him any questions. He knew for certain that whenever Ahmed had any problems he always came to him for consultation and advice. After Ahmed’s eighteenth birthday, Karim decided to treat him as an adult for all practical purposes and unless he sought his indulgence he never asked him questions. In the heart of his hearts, however, he was always sure that Ahmed would seek his advice whenever he needed to. Without wasting any time, Karim patted Ahmed’s back for a good day’s work and started getting on the job to pack the catch into smaller containers. 

Without looking back towards the jetty, Ahmed started walking slowly around the harbor away from the jetty. He moved past the Nasandhura Palace Hotel towards the north side of the island. While sitting on his favorite rock he glanced over the horizon – the setting sun with its glittering orange colored rays dancing over the surface of waves over the sea. He glanced over his shoulder and could clearly visualize the other side as well as the boundaries of his beautiful island. When he turned his body to look towards the rear side, Ahmed felt the whole island was moving from side to side as if he was sitting in a big boat sailing in the Arabian Sea. That was his beautiful island, his small world… Malé! 

Ahmed was always fascinated by his native land of Maldives, which in fact was more of sea than land itself. Since his birth he always lived in Malé, the capital city of Maldives. But he knew that his father originally belonged to a different island, another atoll away from Malé. It was in fact Ahmed’s birth which brought the family to Malé. Mohammad Karim was very well settled in his parental house. Fishing was good. He infrequently visited Malé but never felt too compelled to move out of his own small island. It was only when Ahmed’s mother was pregnant that he became conscious and started getting concerned about the geographical drawbacks of his island. The nurse midwife from the health department checked her up on several occasions during the antenatal period and assured them of her safe delivery. It was also reassuring for them to know that all the atolls had a functional communications system to dispatch a motor boat for transferring a sick patient or a pregnant mother to the Malé General Hospital whenever the situations demanded so. In serious emergencies there was also an arrangement to airlift the patients from the atolls if the sea conditions did not permit the boats to sail. 

Ahmed’s birth in the Malé General Hospital was an adventurous and tragic experience for Karim which changed the rest of his life. Everything was going well till that fateful stormy night when his wife started bleeding. As the intensity of the storm heightened, her condition worsened. The local midwife categorically told him that his wife would need to be transported to Malé or else she could die. It was one of those unfortunate days when nothing worked. Radio messages, the emergency motor boats and the helicopter, nothing seemed to work. With rough tides making it impossible to sail, the storm prevented the helicopter from airlifting her even after the radio message was passed on to the hospital. With every passing second, her condition was deteriorating. Karim could think of no other option but to take the help of his old wooden boat to transport his wife. Karim did reach the hospital on the mainland but not quite in time. Ahmed was born after a cesarean and was revived after a lot of struggle by the doctors but the mother could not be saved. Karim never returned to his atoll after this tragedy and started doing some odd jobs in Malé till he was able to buy a boat again and stand on his own feet. 

Ahmed learnt about his mother and the story of his birth when he was a child. As he grew older he was not sure whether it was because of him that his mother died or was it the sea. As he grew up into a handsome and strong young man and started helping his father, he realized that the sea was their source of income. “Almighty Allah has created this enormous sea with millions and trillions of sea creatures to feed us. We ought to thank Him for His kindness,” the priest in the mosque would often say so during Friday prayers. 

With passage of time Ahmed also realized what the priest said was right. He personally knew many people whose sole source of survival was fishing. His hands would rise in air to praise the Lord for His kindness. But sometimes he felt sad for his mother and the tragedies related to violent tides and storms which nature brought to these islands. His disappointment with Nature reached the lowest ebb when one day Karim took him around the atoll and from a distance showed him the place where he lived twenty years ago. This reminded him about the whole dreadful story related to his mother’s death. For a change Karim was on a mission that day to let his son know about his own ancestors, and the deep sea which was a symbol of life as well as a caution of death. He rowed the boat farther towards the vast ocean, and at a particular point stopped his boat, and with a heavy heart said, *“*Ahmed, do you see those weeds and tree like outline there?” 

Ahmed was able to locate something like weeds or top of the trees somewhere on the surface of the sea water. With a sense of victory he exclaimed, *“*Yes father I can see.” 

“That was the island where my great grandfather lived a hundred years ago,” Karim’s voice trembled and after controlling his emotions he continued, “This water gives us life, provides us food to eat, but then drives us out from our homes.” Ahmed gave him a blank look. He could not understand what his father was talking about. 

“The sea water is ever rising. Our island was submerged in water. Our homes disappeared and our forefathers were driven out from there. In coming years these landmarks of weeds and bushes will also get submerged and you will not ever be able to show this spot to your children.”  Karim’s voice choked with emotion. 

“I don’t know what is going to happen in the future,” Karim sounded very low, “Malé is also sinking every day. May be in another hundred years our mainland also disappears!” 

*** 

Ahmed was deep in his thoughts and remembered what his father had said about Malé sinking every day, when a strong tide came like a bullet from the sea water and struck against the stone with such a great force that Ahmed almost fell down from where he was sitting. For a moment he felt that the gush of water was going to cross over his head and submerge the whole mainland in one stroke. But looking at the Nasandhura Palace Hotel building which was tall above the ground, he was assured that his feet were still on the ground. He quickly moved back on the shore and looked around towards the city with bright lights shining all over the place. It was reassuring to look at life all around on the island rather than to drown into gloomy thoughts by looking towards the sea behind him. 

As soon as Ahmed turned his face towards the mainland and started looking at people, his mind started wavering again. He started recollecting everything that happened in the afternoon that day, when he was about to start his fishing after a successful break at noon time. 

*** 

It was a hot summer afternoon. Ahmed had a heavy lunch – a huge bowl of rice, fish and beans. He felt an irresistible desire to take a short nap. Luckily he spotted a small island about a mile away from his boat. Ahmed was unaware of the exact location of this small island when he saw a boat moving towards the island. From a distance he could spot the couple in the boat who were definitely foreigners. As soon as their boat moved towards the front of the island, the tall palm trees obscured his vision. He suddenly realized that he was around the island where he should not have been. It was that particular island which was forbidden for the locals, as warned by his father. 

Ahmed remembered what his father said on the first day when he was allowed to take his boat all by himself. “Never ever go to that island!” 

“But why?” argued Ahmed. 

“Tourism no doubt is our source of income, but we don’t want to pollute our religion and our culture. These foreigners drink alcohol, women bathe half naked and do all sorts of things. We don’t want our people to be influenced by foreign culture. Therefore it is forbidden for the locals. Only foreigners go there.” 

“What about locals? Why are they not allowed to enjoy the beauty of Mother Nature? It is our land and why can’t we enjoy the beauty of our own islands and resorts?” Ahmed was furious to learn about the extent of discrimination against the real inhabitants of the islands. 

“No my son, it is not like this. We also have another island, and it is meant only for locals. No foreigner can visit that island.” Karim was quite explicit in saying what he had to and it made sense to Ahmed as well. Even looking towards the forbidden island was one of the don’ts which Karim had included in his son’s checklist. 

At noon time  that day,  when Ahmed  rowed his boat around the forbidden island,  the place  seemed to be unusually quiet,  maybe because on weekdays  one would not expect anybody there,  particularly at noon time. Ahmed very well remembered his checklist but the shady palm trees on the island tempted him so much that he was not able to control his instincts. He decided that he would take his boat towards the back side of the island which was even more shady as the sun had started moving towards the west. Anchoring his boat away near the island would not be considered going to the forbidden island and at the same time he could take a short nap under the shadow of palm trees. Moreover, except for that couple who moved in from the other side, there was no possibility of even being seen by anybody. To make his operation absolutely risk free, he switched off the motor when he was nearing the island. He gently rowed his boat with the oars and anchored it under a cool shaded area. 

It did not take Ahmed long to go into a deep slumber and catch a lot of heavy-priced fish in his dreams. Lot of them... He was very happy. He was certain that his father would be thrilled to see this catch today. But while he was busy in his dreams arranging his catch in the box, he saw a huge shark that surfaced from the sea and pounced on him. Ahmed screamed with fear and the next moment he was awake. He laughed at his being so timid and was about to disengage his boat when he heard a scream from a distance. He got startled. He believed his dream was over, but that scream attracted his attention. He was not able to figure out from where the sound came. He heard the scream once again, this time louder and with expressions of obvious fear and panic. By the time he could locate the direction of the scream he clearly heard, “Help! Help! Somebody save me!” He couldn’t understand the meaning of the whole sentence but was certain that it was a distress call by a woman. 

Ahmed forgot about his checklist and immediately moved towards the direction of the sound. Within a minute he reached the hotel building on the island and was shattered to see the same couple he had seen a while ago fighting with each other. It did not take him long to realize that they were not fighting but the man was forcibly dragging the woman inside the hotel. Ahmed was in a dilemma whether he should help the woman or leave them alone. 

“Why are you dragging me towards the bath tub? Why are you tying my hands? Oh God! You want to kill me?” Ahmed did not understand everything which was said in English but had no doubt that the woman inside the hotel was in danger. 

“Help, somebody help!” the women kept on screaming. 

For a second Ahmed decided to quickly get into the room and save the helpless woman from the clutches of this beast who seemed to be up to some mischief.  But it immediately crossed his mind that he should not have been there. Ahmed was unable to decide whether he should be guided by the rules or by his intuition. But then his father’s warning took the upper hand and he quickly returned to his boat. While he was quickly speeding away from the island with the help of oars, without switching on his engine, he could still hear the painful groaning, “Somebody help! He wants to kill me… Help!” 

Ahmed started the engine and within seconds the screams drowned in the noise of the engine. He rushed his boat fast towards Malé and when he reached near the mainland, he again switched off the engine and started pondering about what happened a while ago. He spent the whole afternoon sitting in the boat doing nothing and when he returned to the jetty, his condition was vulnerable. He sat at the rock till late night thinking about the woman he thought was in danger. 

Ahmed returned from the harbor quite late, quietly ate his dinner and went off to sleep. But he was unable to sleep. He cursed himself for not helping somebody in distress. The Holy Quran said, “*Helping those in distress is a rewardable charity…,”* but he had failed as a devout Muslim. It was sheer cowardice that he let somebody use force on a woman who was screaming for help. He should have helped the woman in distress. He felt ashamed of himself. But then if he was asked why he went to the forbidden island, he had no justification. It would simply mean breaking the rules. What could he say? Father had strongly advised him not to boat that side. The rules also forbade locals to enter that island. And if it was just a friendly game between the two of them...? Ahmed was unable to sleep all through the night. He kept on turning his sides till he slept off in the wee hours of the morning. 

*** 

Next morning Karim woke him up with a tragic story. *“*Allah save all of us from sin,” Karim was telling his neighbor, “Last evening a foreigner’s wife got drowned in the sea. They were swimming near the forbidden island.  Poor man could not save her. Police is trying to locate her dead body….” 

Ahmed felt a big lump in his throat and a thump over his chest. 


