From: Karan Mujoo <karanmujoo.tree@gmail.com>
Date: Mon, 22 Jun 2015 08:41:43 +0530
Subject: SUBMISSION
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>
Bio: Karan Mujoo is a poet and writer residing in New Delhi. He dons the hat of an advertising writer during the day and moonlights as a poet and short story writer when the sun sets.

The Neighbour 

Karan Mujoo 

Dusk was falling rapidly as Arjan Nath Bhat made his way home. He was wearing a safari suit, the unofficial uniform of all middle level government officials across India. In his right hand, he held a brown briefcase, which contained official papers indecipherable to the common man. It had taken him many years of hard work to reach his current post, that of an assistant registrar in a food co-operative. 

As he entered Zaindar mohalla, he could not help but stop and look around at the place that had been his home for the last fifty years. He had played in these lanes as a little child, loitered in them as a youth and taken comfort in their familiarity as a middle-aged man. After idling around for a moment, he decided, as a man has to often in life, to move on[why does he stop – just to give the reader a view. Hmm! Makes it too ]. 

On approaching the gate of his single storey brick home, he could see Abdul Gaffar preparing the hookah. A reed thin man with a pointy face and a long beard, Abdul Gaffar worked as a clerk in the postal department. Arjan Nath waved to his neighbour and gestured that he would soon join him. 

Inside his modest and comfortable home Arjan Nath was surrounded by a barrage of questions from his wife and sons. As a man whose job entailed dealing with people in power regularly he was supposed to have his ear on the ground. But the truth was, he knew only as much as anyone else on the street. Everything was shrouded in a blanket of secrecy, fear and propaganda. He answered his family’s queries as well as he could and left to freshen up. 

Abdul Gaffar welcomed him warmly. Their ritual of smoking hookah in the evening had started purely by chance a decade ago. One day, when Arjan Nath had run out of coals to light his own hookah, he had gone over to his neighbour, who not only gave him a few coals, but also suggested that they share a session. Over the next few hours, as clouds of smoke hung in the sky like tiny nimbuses, both men found a friendship which had only grown thicker with time. They bonded over poetry, found loopholes in various government procedures and discussed, as all men do, politics and statesmanship. 

This meeting, which was usually chatty, was unusually quiet today. Arjan Nath sat down and inhaled deeply from the hookah. His brows were furrowed. Abdul Gaffar knew that his friend was unsettled by what had been going on in the valley during the past few months. He wondered whether he should give assurances to his friend, assurances in which he himself did not believe. There had been a lot of fiery talk at the mosque. Surely, at the moment most of it was just talk, but one never knew when someone would lose his temper and break bonds cultivated over centuries. He himself had been troubled by the recent developments. What had seemed to be an underground fringe movement was quickly becoming mainstream. 

Arjan Nath broke the silence by asking his friend how Nasima’s back was. Abdul grimaced at the mention of his better half’s name and shrugged his shoulders. ‘We went to the doctor yesterday. He advised her to get some rest. She gave me a look as if I had been asking her to move mountains around the house. I got a servant, even though I couldn’t really afford one, 3 years ago. What do these doctors know anyway? For everything they just say, rest, rest, rest.’ Arjan Nath smiled at his friend’s outburst. Nasima Begum was the perfect example of a nagger. She had, over the years, slowly chipped away at the spirit of Abdul Gaffar till there was nothing but a hollow shell left [how does Arjun Nath know that?]. Not a leaf moved in that house until it had the approval of Nasima Begum. ‘If you want, my son can have a look at her, he has just come back from his posting in Rang.’ Arjan Nath offered.  Abdul Gaffar knew what his wife would say, ‘I don’t trust medicines, a bit of rest and I will be alright.’ Still he thanked his friend and told him he would ask Nasima about it. The ice around their conversation had thawed a bit now. They started discussing the works of Mahjoor, Lal Ded and Soch Kral. Both men wrote a bit in their spare time and were each other’s only audience. They read couplets to each other as one star drowned and countless others sprung up over the dark valley sky. 

While he was in the middle of a couplet Abdul Gaffar suddenly panicked. He remembered that any moment now, the mosque loudspeaker would start bellowing. He did not want to be seated opposite his friend when that happened. Both of them avoided mentioning the circumstances they were caught in; afraid that acknowledging the situation would shatter the smoky little world they had created, Abdul Gaffar’s mind raced to find an excuse to get away. He was saved from this predicament by his servant, who on the orders of Nasima summoned him for dinner. Both men got up, bid each other good night and got back into their roles as husbands and fathers. 

Arjan Nath sat down on the takhtposh to eat his dinner. It consisted of the usual staple of bhatta (rice) along with generous helpings of haakh (a green leafy vegetable) and tsaman (cheese). The whole family ate together in deafening silence, unaware of what the coming days held for them. Around 11 in the night there was a knock on the door. Arjan Nath’s eldest son, the doctor, walked into his father’s room and said, ‘Noor Mohammad Haji saab wants to see you.’ Arjan Nath got up groggily to receive the untimely visitor, and on the way out asked his wife to make a cup of kahwa for the guest. 

Noor Mohhamad Haji was one of the most influential and rich Muslims in Zaindar Mohalla. As the suffix to his name suggested he had been to the Mecca for Haj. Arjan Nath had from time to time dealt with him on official matters. They were acquaintances, nothing less, nothing more. Thus his arrival at this time of night aroused a certain amount of trepidation in the family. Dressed in an expensive looking embroidered pheran Noor Mohhamad was seated in the drawing room. Arjan Nath greeted him courteously. ‘Namaskar Noor sahib, I hope everything is alright.’ Noor Mohammad fidgeted a little bit and answered, ‘By the grace of Allah all is well Bhat sahib. I apologise for having called on you so late, but my conscience would not let me sleep. There is something which I must share with you.’ Arjan Nath had an inkling of what was about to follow. ‘Haji Sahab, please tell me what is bothering you. Perhaps, I might be of some help.’ Noor Mohammad smiled ruefully at the irony of these words. ‘Your younger son, the engineer, does he keep a beard in the winters?’ At first Arjan Nath could not comprehend the question. Was this old man in his senses? What was this nonsense about keeping a beard? But he replied patiently, ‘Yes, he does Noor sahab. It is so cold in the winters, it’s almost impossible to shave daily. Of course, you know this as well as I do.’ On hearing this Noor Mohammad’s face became grave and he spoke, ‘I understand Bhat Sahab, but unfortunately the young boys at the mosque don’t. They are convinced that your son is a mukhbir (informant). They believe he passes on information about his Muslim friends and their acquaintances to the army.’ Arjan Nath could not believe what he was hearing. ‘But Haji sahab, you know our family, how could my son be an informant, he is a simple boy who goes to work in the morning and comes back in the evening!’ Noor Mohammad held the hands of Arjan Nath and said, ‘Bhat sahab, I believe you. But what can an old man like me do to stem the boiling blood that is raging in the arms of these youngsters. I have told you what I’ve heard. I do not think it is safe for you to stay in Zaindar mohalla anymore.’ Arjan Nath replied in an exasperated voice, ‘But where will we go? We have lived here for decades now. My father lived here and his father before him. We have known no other place. There is nowhere for us to go. Our home is here, our friends are here, our future is here.’ Noor Mohammad stood silently in front of him and stared at the hard cold floor. ‘Do what is best for your family Bhat Sahab. Hopefully everything will be back to normal soon.’ No sooner had he uttered these words that the loud speaker in the mosque started spewing hatred. His job done, Noor Mohammad Haji walked out into the dark and increasingly sinister night. 

When Arjan Nath’s wife walked into the drawing room with the kehwa, he was sitting with his head held in his hands. There were tears flowing from his eyes. ‘We have to leave, Bitto’s name is on the hitlist’, he told his wife. His wife, being a woman, was of a more pragmatic bend of mind. She knew now was not the time for remorse. They had to leave as soon as possible. She went to her sons and daughter-in-laws and told them to put only their most essential and valuable items in the heavy steel trunks. 

After they had been packing for a while, Arjan Nath’s elder son approached him, ‘Bejan, what about the house? Surely, we cannot just abandon it.’ Arjan Nath put his hand on his son’s shoulder and said, ‘These troubles won’t last forever. We will stay in Jammu till these times tide over, then we will come back and reclaim our house’ His son reluctantly accepted this unconvincing explanation. In times of despair, even a ray of hope seems like voluminous sunshine. 

Arjan Nath used his good offices to make a few calls. A military truck passing by Zaindar mohalla in a few hours would pick them up. They were advised not to carry too much luggage. Arjan Nath gazed at his house and its contents. It seemed strange to him that his absolute needs could fit in a steel trunk. The rest was just hoarding for the sake of hoarding. Decorative items to impress guests, paintings hung not for aesthetic purposes, but just to cover up the nudity of walls. All were just man’s attempt to fill the empty spaces in his home. 

At 4.30 am he received a call that the truck would be there in half an hour. Arjan Nath could not put off the dreaded moment any more. He went outside and breathed deeply, trying to store in his lungs as much of Kashmir’s air as he could. He wanted to imprint these smells and sights in his memory. He looked around at the ancient, derelict houses and it seemed to him that Kashmir was eternally caught in a strange time warp. Nothing ever changed here, still everything did. He walked over to his friend’s house and after a moment of hesitation knocked on his door. 

Sounds of ruffling sheets and shuffling feet could be heard, along with curses of a woman. Arjan Nath felt a little guilty about waking his friend up so early. The door was opened by a slightly dishevelled Abdul Gaffar. He was surprised to see his friend standing outside his door, at this ungodly hour, fully dressed. ‘Is everything alright?’ he enquired. Arjan Nath looked at his startled friend and said, ‘We are leaving for Jammu, it’s not safe for us here anymore.’ A painful look crossed the face of Abdul Gaffar. In his heart of hearts he had known that this moment would come, but that it would come so suddenly and swiftly he had not anticipated. A few unsure words tumbled out of his mouth ‘But you have lived your whole life here, everybody knows you, you will be safe.’ Arjan Nath’s heart desperately wanted to believe his friend, but his head knew better. ‘I will have to go my friend. There is no other way. Bitoo’s name is on the hitlist.’ Abdul Gaffar looked crestfallen. He told his friend to wait a moment and went inside his house. Arjan Nath could hear the rough voice of Nasima Begum barking orders, whether at her husband or the servant, he could not tell. He wondered where his friend had disappeared. After a minute or so Abdul Gaffar appeared with the hookah. Both of them sat around it, as they had done every single evening for the past 10 years. They took a couple of drags each. The gurgling sound made by the hookah was the only thing that could be heard in the valley for miles. The elephant in the room could not be ignored anymore. Abdul Gaffar broke the silence, ‘When I was a child my father used to say, before Hindus, before Mussalmans, we are all Kashmiris. Kashmiriyat is our real religion. But, that was a long time ago. I do not understand what people want anymore. Only thing I can hope for is this that this madness will soon subside and you’ll be able to come back home.’ Arjan Nath knew it was difficult for his friend to speak about this matter, so he quickly laid it to rest. ‘I hope so too Abdul. This valley has been our home for generations. I am sure things will work out eventually. And we will be back.’ Both men sat in silence again smoking their hookah. For those few minutes Arjan Nath forgot all his troubles. The hypnotic rising and falling of the smoke invoked transient amnesia in him. This peace was shattered by the rumbling noise of a heavy truck’s engine which snapped them both out of their reverie. 

As Arjan Nath rose he could feel the full force of gravity pull him downwards, his motherland did not want him to leave. He looked towards the horizon and his eyes were glued to the two bright lights of destiny that were tearing through the darkness and edging closer to him. ‘Khuda hafiz my friend, come back soon. I will be waiting right here for you. Along with Mahjoor, Lal Ded and others’, Abdul stuttered. Arjan Nath embraced his friend, and though he wanted to say a million things, all he could utter was a simple goodbye. 

His family was ready with their luggage. Arjan Nath, still in a sort of trance, touched the brick walls of his ancestral home - a home where countless generations had lived and died. He checked and double checked all the locks, even though he knew it was a futile exercise. He asked his son if he had locked the terrace door properly; as if they were just going to a wedding and would be back in a few hours. It was only when the military truck stopped outside their home and honked loudly that he finally walked out of the main door. He turned the key on the final lock and then tugged at it to make sure it was fastened properly. It was a final attempt at normality by a man, whose fate had been sealed by someone else’s madness. 

The tired yet gallant [remove adjectives, and heroism etc – makes it sound like a child’s tale.]army men helped them put their heavy trunks and other luggage into the truck. His sons, daughter-in-laws and wife climbed into the back of the truck. He walked slowly, reluctantly, towards the front of the truck and got in wearily. The truck roared to life and lurched forward. Arjan Nath could see his friend Abdul Gaffar in the rear view mirror. He stood there until the truck took the final turn out of Zaindar Mohalla and unbeknownst to Arjan Nath, long after that as well. As the sun came up from the East, he shut his eyes and plunged into darkness. 

They reached Jammu after around 12 hours of travelling. A cousin of Arjan Nath had come to pick them up with a small tempo. They would be staying with him in Talab Tillo for the next few days. As they were unloading their luggage, Arjan Nath came upon an unfamiliar box. Perplexed, he called his son and asked him if he knew anything about it. ‘Bejan, when you went to sit in the front of the truck, Abdul Chacha came to us in the back, and handed over this box, saying it contained something that belonged to you.’ Arjan Nath tried to remember if he had forgotten something in his friend’s home. Unable to do so, he finally opened the box. Inside the box was something wrapped in a newspaper. When Arjan Nath removed the paper, tears welled up in his eyes. It was the hookah. [yes, agree, Leela. The whole story rests on the edge of veering from good to sentimental. SO much so that I am uncertain about it. But this last paragraph tips the balance. Removing still retains the poignancy that is already a bit too sweet for my taste.] 

 

