From: meghna pant <meghnapant@gmail.com>
Date: Fri, Oct 9, 2015 at 7:38 PM
Subject: DNA-Out of Print 2015
To: dnashortstories@gmail.com

THE GOOD HUSBAND 

My mother died five months ago. My father died four months ago. My wife died a month ago. 

I look at Katie’s photograph on the bedside table. Her face is narrow, like a shadow, the sort that can slip under a keyhole. Her green eyes, squinted against the sun, stare back at me, unblinking. 

I might as well tell you the truth. My wife isn’t dead, yet. She’s comatose. 

I’ll tell you another truth. This kind of behaviour is typical of Katie. She’s always undecided. After nagging me for a year to get married, she developed cold feet a week before our wedding, and then suddenly declared that we would be together in sickness and in health. When my company transferred me from Connecticut to Mumbai, she immediately quit her teaching job, eager as she was to move, and within a month began pining for America. She told me in the first year of our relationship that she liked my shirt tucked out of my pants and now she wants it tucked in. Her brain killed her for forty seconds from an aneurism, but then she decided that she’d continue to live, or half-live. 

I wish that she’d make up her mind once and for all. 

The doctor tells me sympathetically me that there’s little hope for Katie, as if hope can be big or little, like a person. By the way his head tilts I know he feels sorry for me. I shed a tear. I also feel sorry for myself. Because the thing is, and here’s the thing, that if Katie grabs this ‘little hope’ by which to live, she would become what we humans call ‘a vegetable’. Which means that I’d have to spend the rest of my life, day after day, minute after minute, taking care of Katie. I am the kind of person who thought that myopia was a disease and held a baby, only once, to drop it like a rock (fortunately onto a plush bassinet). I will not be able to look after an undead wife. 

“Screw you,” I say, and slam down Katie’s photo. 

The digital clock is blinking its red numbers: 3:45 p.m. What day is it today? I count the last time my downstairs neighbor Aliya had come home. One … two … three … four. Four days ago. So, today is Wednesday. 

I stretch languidly on my bed. I don’t have to be anywhere, not even at work. My consulting company has put me on indefinite – and paid – leave, for my “indescribable loss”, as that lumpy Mrs HR lady wrote in her terribly long email. The fact is – and I realise this with relish as I bury my face into my big soft pillow – that I may never have to work again. I’ve inherited my parent’s three-bedroom apartment in Worli and their fixed deposits. I have a rich, unmarried uncle, my mother’s brother, who is taking care of Katie’s hospital bills, and most of mine. He never found use for his money, except to live in apology of it. Yet he was so consumed with making money from the stock market that he didn’t speak to anyone, including my mother for many years. Her death shook him. He needed to assuage his guilt, for the dead command more attention than the living. Now he calls every Sunday to ask if I need money. I don’t say anything. He mistakes my silence for pride, and sends his driver with wads of thousand-rupee notes, sometimes running into fifty thousand, sometimes ten thousand. I don’t stop him. Of what use is money to men who don’t know how to spend it? 

Aliya, my downstairs neighbour, will be here shortly, to fulfill her duty as one of my many sympathizers, though none of my other sympathizers have a mouth like a liquid feather bed, breasts like paddling pools and legs long enough to wrap around me. I’d desired her eight years ago, when she was fourteen, her beauty already fitting into tight dresses. I thought of her during random moments in America, on a hot day when I licked an ice-cream cone in Central Park or stood in the subway train with bodies pressed against mine. On coming back to India with my squat, flat-chested American wife, I noticed Aliya’s raven beauty: full, sparkly and bold. 

“You poor thing,” she’d said, coming home one evening, a week after Katie was hospitalised. She put her arms around me. Her breasts pressed against my chest. “Is there anything I can do to help?” 

I pulled away, ready to burst from my pent-up lust. She saw tears in my eyes and mistook my lust for grief. She kissed my cheeks and my lips. Now, every Wednesday and Saturday, when her parents are at the Wellington Club playing a few rounds of rummy, she comes home to play a few rounds of sex. And how she plays: neither the Indian way, because there’s a lingering freedom about it, nor the American way, because there’s a lingering taboo about it. It’s fantastic. 

I need to take a cold shower. I bathe on days that Aliya comes home, twice a week. For the other days there is no need. I no longer meet people. My friends, or the smattering that is left of them after they’ve become half-men and half-women, the rest consumed by demanding jobs, nagging spouses and needy children, no longer visit me. Initially they tried – they had survived, I hadn’t – but the long, awkward silence that follows the ravaged mind of tragic men was too much for these men who filled their life with noise. Soon, I became a memory to these men, a conversation stopper before they jostled up something more savory. 

No parents. No wife. No colleagues. No boss. No friends. 

I am losing my former life like a snake shedding skin. 

But I have one thing. I have a body. That is enough for me. 

I look at the clock. 5:05 pm 

The body will be here soon and I’m getting horny. My hunger for Aliya reaches my stomach. It growls. I walk to the kitchen and open the fridge. 

I haven’t gone hungry since my triplets – people have triple babies and triple promotions, I have a triple tragedy. Mrs. Khanna, my next-door neighbour, has devised a roster system whereby each household in the building takes turns to make food for me. My father had loaned her twenty-thousand-rupees three years ago that she hasn’t repaid. She doesn’t know I know. I allow her to pay for her guilt by playing on the sympathy and morality of our other neighbors. My neighbors do not know what to do with a man in his 40’s living alone in his three-bedroom apartment despite having a wife, so they feed me like they’re feeding a family, my missing family. My fridge is bursting with food, most of which has turned green and reeks out brown liquid. I like to watch the food dwindle away and come to naught, as all life must. I don’t clean anything either. My house smells of ammonia and sulphur, unlike anything I’ve smelled in a house. It’s scented with my odors. I feel proud. 

I take out today’s meal from the Parsi family: a rack of lamb, lathered in oil and sesame seeds. I eat it cold, with my hands. I’ve been so hungry since Katie’s hospitalisation that sometimes I wake up in the middle of the night, feeling an aching urgent hunger, as if I’ve been out hunting for food. Then I ravage whatever food I can find. 

Afterwards, I belch – loud and satisfactory. I pat my ovular belly, where there’d been abs just four months ago. 

I light a doobie. I smoked endlessly now, not out of the window as I would have around Katie, but inside the house. I watch the smoke spiral languidly from my mouth. My eyes are always red now, from drinking and drugs. People think I’ve been crying. It isn’t my fault that people ascribe emotion to every relationship. In marriage they expect to see love, or at least, co-dependence. Who am I to shake this universal paradigm? 

I switch on the TV and flip channels. I stop at National Geographic where a man’s self-assured British accent tells me that lions move on pretty quickly after their mates die. The King of the Jungle is not so noble after all. I wonder if it’s only us humans who emote excessively, unnecessarily, so much so that the human experience has become essential to everything – a chair has ‘arms’, the lion is ‘king’, paradise is ‘benevolent’ and the dead have ‘hope’. Little Hope and Big Hope. 

We make such a spectacle of death, ascribing to it that same human experience, calling it wicked and evil, and eyeing it with the quaking fear of a deer being hunted by cheetahs. We spend our entire childhood fearing the dark and our entire adult life fearing the light. 

I think of how Mom and Dad would have coped if I’d gone before them. Would they have died of heart failure as Dad had after Mom’s accident? Probably not. In the circle of life parents witness their child’s birth and a child witnesses his parent’s death. My parents hadn’t witnessed my birth. Mom was heavily medicated, while Dad was stuck in traffic. I was born alone. They never expressed regret or guilt about it. In turn – karma, of course – I didn’t witness my parent’s death. They left quickly, efficiently (this was just the kind of people they were) and without saying goodbye. I too refuse to feel regret or guilt. We are (were?) an efficient family. 

I speculate on what Katie would do if I die before her. She’d have a dinner party on the day of my funeral, as is the custom in her family. The next week she’d book a one-way ticket to New York. Six months later she would remarry, probably that ex-boyfriend of hers, the one (she confessed once in a martini-infused state) who got away. She would be an elegant widow, a short-lived one. 

Some dead are forgotten as if they are shadows passing the earth. 

I will not cry. 

It’s six o’clock. Aliya will be home any minute. I look around for a clean pair of underwear. I can’t remember where I’ve kept one. It strikes me then that Katie would’ve known. 

Katie knew everything about me. And despite that she stayed with me. She played house-house with me: husband and wife. She planned the names of our children. She remembered my birthday and reminded me gently of her own. She flattened the end of my toothpaste tube so I didn’t have to squeeze too hard. 

I wonder then if I’ve been unfair to Katie. All I have of her are memories that I haven’t been entirely true to. Maybe I love her. Maybe I need her. Vegetable or not, I need her, I love her. Without her I am alone in the world. 

The cry I’ve been holding back for all these months’ wells up in my eyes. It becomes a sob. And then I am wailing. I cry first for myself, for my pathetic loneliness, then for my Katie who may never hold me again, and then for my parents whose love was incomplete but sincere. I cry for everything in my life that has gone wrong, and right. I don’t care if anyone hears me, not even Aliya with her breasts like paddling pools. I let it all out. 

*Come back to me, Katie. Come back.* 

*I will be a better husband, a better man.* 

*I will let you love me. I will try to love you.* 

The phone rings. I pick it up without thinking. I hear Dr. Mahmood’s voice. 

“I’m sorry, Chander. Katie didn’t make it. We tried our best. But––” 

The doorbell rings. It’s Aliya. I put the phone down and open the door. 

**** 

BIO DATA 

I am an award-winning author and journalist. 

My debut collection of short stories* Happy Birthday* (Random House India, 2013) was longlisted for the prestigious *Frank O'Connor International Award 2014, *the world’s biggest short story prize*.* *One And A Half Wife *(Westland, 2012) – my debut novel – won the national Muse India *Young Writer Award* and was shortlisted for other awards, including the *Amazon Breakthrough Novel Award*. 

I recently abridged the world’s longest epic, *The Mahabharata, *into one hundred tweets that *The Guardian *reviewed as ‘wonderfully descriptive and paced’. My short stories have been published in over a dozen international literary magazines, including Avatar Review, Wasafari, Eclectica and QLRS. 

Booker-shortlisted author Jeet Thayil has described my writing as ‘deft and expertly-tuned’, award-winning author Jerry Pinto as ‘competent’, bestselling author Ashwin Sanghi as ‘provocative and inspirational’, and renowned international author Chitra Banerjee Divakaruni as ‘surprising and moving’. 

I previously worked as a TV anchor with Times Now, NDTV Profit and Bloomberg-UTV, where I reported from the New York Stock Exchange. I have met and interviewed President Obama, Mukesh Ambani, Sir Richard Branson, Hillary Clinton, Ratan Tata and Shah Rukh Khan, among others. 

