From: srikanth nadadur <srikanth.kn@gmail.com>
Date: 14 September 2015 at 14:18
Subject: SUBMISSION
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

*Bio* 

Srikanth is a test engineer from Bengaluru. Cricket writing, English and Kannada literature about India and its people, interest him. 

*Short Story* 

*Legacy* 

"A respectable and religious man" was his introduction with every new acquaintance in the community of disciples. The former, was to be discerned from the fact he had retired from a government job albeit a bit early, owned a house, a family which was labeled "decent", and had brought up kids who were well-educated and in well-paying jobs. The latter, from the fact that he would bring in religious themes into the conversation very often, like a geeky kid who always rambles about his toys when spoken to. It had been a few years since religion had come into his life, but had brought about a transformation akin to caterpillar becoming a butterfly.Over these years, Raghava the nondescript householder had become Raghavan a prominent disciple of the “Swami”. The newly added “n” at the end of his name, brought an air of respectability to it, which he secretly cherished.If it wasn’t for his family, siblings and distant relatives, Raghava, the householder,  may as well have disappeared. 

Not much was known about his householder past, and he rarely spoke of it within the community. It turned out that a debauched father was the reason. Many of his cousins and distant relatives couldn’t talk to him or his siblings without the shadow of their father lurking in the background during their conversations and it had particularly alienated Raghava from them.  The impact of this paternal legacy, had meant that his siblings took to religion big time or migrated abroad to rid of the “taint”. The ones into religion were also the disciples of the same “Swami” and there was an unspoken competition among them. Raghava’s rise in the ranks of the disciples gave rise to secret jealousy in his siblings and the relationship cooled. On the other hand, Raghavan the disciple, had found a new set of relatives in the family of the Swami, on his own terms, who would not snigger behind his back or dig into his past and it was priceless. He was a man of many talents, and these proved to be useful to Swami’s family to adapt to the demands of the modern times in which they lived. It was a symbiotic relationship where social respectability for Raghava’s family was exchanged for services which helped the Swami’s family, and it flourished over many years. The profile picture on his Facebook page, depicting him seated at the feet of the Swami, who sat on the chair engaged in a sermon, was symbolic of the image he had cultivated over the years. The joke went around the disciple community that he was Swami’s Hanuman, who did his bidding unquestioned. Raghava had begun to dream of the day of his death where he would be celebrated for his piety and even those relatives, who sniggered behind his back would have to pay obeisance to his dead body and his family. It was as though he had achieved everything he imagined in life and subconsciously, it was his version of salvation. A version very different from the one offered in Swami’s teachings which involved, heaven, hell, god’s abode and other celestial realms professed by the scriptures. His soul attaining god’s abode was important to him, but ridding the taint mattered more. 

Swami was not his name, but a title. His name was a long one, always used with all the honorary titles bestowed on his family. It was suitable for invitations prepared for his religious sermons and other religious functions. During conversations, everyone referred to him through his title “Swami”. Swami was not an ascetic, but a householder with many sons and daughters. He was from a family of religious preachers who had distinguished themselves through their religious scholarship and leadership over many generations within his caste. In many of his discourses he would talk about his forefathers and his family’s links to the legendary figures of his caste. There was a legend that his grandfather had got a white judge to pass an order which entitled his family to  privileges at the village temple,which were exclusive ,  India was still a British colony, when he was born, The family had a big house in the village, and a decent inheritance. The villagers respected him irrespective of their caste and would refer to him by his title. Fellow caste members in his own village and surrounding villages held him in high esteem due to birth, as well as scholarship, even before he was twenty. His family’s approval was sought in major decisions, even if, personal in nature. All the major functions at the temple would be presided over by the family members. His special status bordering divinity was symbolized by the annual event where, the Swami was paraded by his disciples, in a palanquin, along the main street of the village, which culminated at the temple much like the idols of  the gods in the temple. This practice too, had a divine legend associated with it. Every year he sat with a pose of humility, as though in prayer, while he was paraded through the village. 

But there were winds of change blowing in Independent India. Slowly the families of his caste, stripped of their huge land holdings by the government, started to move to urban centers in search of jobs and better living. They were on their own, and cities with its government jobs and private enterprises beckoned them. Swami’s inherited fortune was also considerably reduced. In about 20 years, there were hardly any families of his caste residing in his village or any of the surrounding ones. They were now mere visitors to the village during the annual car festival at the temple. People of lower caste, now conscious of their discrimination for centuries and newly acquired rights to own land, did not hold his family in the same esteem as earlier. The palanquin parade stopped. These did not bother him much, but, when two of his sons decided to pursue jobs in the city, rather than religious scholarship like him, it was a bit hard for him to swallow. He was worried that he might be the last in his family line of preachers.His not so bright youngest son was the last bet. Independent India  challenged the survival of families  burdened by of tradition and legacy, many perished, and became mere surnames,  Those that survived, adapted to the challenges of the modern times. 

Swami, now middle-aged, adapted. He was always considered old-school in approach, in that, he did not mix politics with religion or amass wealth for himself. There were no personal scandals or blemishes. These held him in good stead now. He would now visit the cities, where his lectures would be organized by his disciples who made their livelihood in the cities. The cities were now a confluence of upper caste migrants similar to those from his village and were nostalgic about the religion they left behind in the villages while they made their livelihood in the cities. They embraced Swami’s teachings and he became a glue of sorts, between the many sub-castes within the caste. Audience at his religious discourses swelled, and many would become his disciples. In these public sermons, Swami preached a version of religion which was less dogmatic and would not compromise the lifestyle of these urban dwellers. There were no signs of blatant orthodoxy, such as insistence on traditional attire, restrictions on diet and travel, but traditional caste boundaries and gender discrimination were preserved. He dazzled them with stories from tradition and religious mysticism.  By the time Swami turned 60, he had a large loyal group of disciples in the city. Many were a decade or two younger than the Swami but they considered him their spiritual guide, one who would lead them on the path to salvation. They considered it a privilege, to host him at their houses, and donate money to cover his travel and supplement his income. They visited his house in the village on dates deemed very auspicious by Swami (which would mostly be the birth anniversaries of his father, grandfather or legendary figures of his caste). Themed tours to temples deemed important by tradition would become a rage. Raghava belonged to this golden generation of Swami’s disciples. 

Swami also had to walk the tight rope. He could not alienate the traditional religious institutions i.e. the monasteries of the city which had flourished under royal patronage, but now were in terminal decline. It was an entity with a “seer”, who was the head of the monastery and a bunch of traditionalists who helped with day-to-day activities of the monastery. The traditionalists were from families of priests who officiated religious ceremonies in the house of all the caste members. In this religious veneer, mysticism espoused by Swami, though very different from the ritualistic practices of priesthood, got along together, albeit with some discomfort. It was always said that both were necessary for salvation of the soul, but one could not point any theological reason for the same. The traditionalists, were the enforcers of the caste, the moral compass of sorts. They led an austere life with many restrictions on diet, travel and socialized carefully. Their religious fervor, gave them a strange power over other caste members. This power was seen in religious ceremonies where they would closely monitor the rituals and dictate many aspects of the ceremony. Swami was wary of their power. In the midst of seers, traditionalists and bigots he would preach a more dogmatic version of religion which  proclaimed theological superiority over other traditional schools and despised at modernist tendencies among people, But subtlety was always maintained and never did he come across as shrill. Over the years, many disciples of the Swami  turned into traditionalists. The power vested in traditionalists was always an attraction and many jumped the boat to get the taste of it. Raghavan stuck with the Swami and he could talk to the traditionalists and novice disciples with ease. 

Raghavan, initially impressed the Swami with his grasp of the theology taught by him, but it was the beaver-like industry that impressed him the most. Over the years, their conversations would start from being theological or mystical discussions and would turn to a projects to be undertaken to spread the message of Swami’s school of religious thought. Over time, Raghavan would convince the Swami, that there was a need to embrace modernity, especially technology subtly to propagate the Swami’s teachings to the masses and also build connections in the society. The material for the sermons, which till now resided in unbound notebooks for personal reference came out as books. There  were audio CDs of the public sermons. Many public sermons were broadcast live abroad, which was mostly to US. There would also be a website where his disciples, now large in number, would feel that they were a “community” than just members of the same caste. The Swami became a minor celebrity of sorts within the caste and with the donations received from abroad, which were enormous relative to those of his Indian disciples, his family began owning assets in couple of the cities he frequented. They would now be scrutinized by his disciples and had to appear charitable as though it was the only expression of their wealth. Many realtors, doctors, lawyers and even politicians began to be counted as disciples of the Swami. He wielded a soft power over them, in that, they could not refuse a favor asked by him, but, with the burden of safeguarding the family name, he was rarely seen wielding this power. Raghavan was the catalyst in the rise of fortunes of the Swami and his family and there was even a faint gratitude towards him in Swami. 

The tryst with modernity did come with its share of problems, especially during interactions with the disciples from abroad. Some would pose questions as though Swami was a petty astrologer, which he found annoying and there were smart-alecks who had studied other schools of philosophical thought and would almost start a debate on interpreting the scriptures with him. At times, he was astonished at their scholarship, but debates were not pushed too far by either party for the sake of harmony. The kids with their American frankness were a bother. They smirked at the religious marks on his face and his bald head with a short unbraided strands of hair at the back and posed silly questions. The most common was on the mandatory use of the right hand for all activities in religious ceremonies. In most cases the parents came to his rescue by admonishing the child. 

Closer to home, there was a far more serious issue of retaining faith among the young of the affluent families of his caste who formed the core of the disciple community. Globalization had arrived in India, and the young unlike their parents, did not depend on government jobs. Career and lifestyle aspirations meant that they could not spare much time for faith, but were very liberal with donations. Unlike their parents, who could recall books full of verses from memory during the religious ceremonies and argue about the flaws in procedure, the young would be silent and could be seen going through the motions. They seemed uncomfortable and bored during sermons and there were also rationalist tendencies. It was the loyalty towards their parents that made them continue the traditions and it was hard to tell if they would stay in the veneer of religion as they grew old. There was also competition from new age gurus and Raghavan, in particular would chastise them frequently as opportunists and idiots maligning the religion when given the opportunity to speak in many of the public sermons. He spearheaded another initiative of bringing religion to the kids. “Catch’em young” was  the mantra. There were now summer camps, religion-themed board games and even a video game for kids to learn about their religion. But these met with limited success. Swami was stoic and attribute the loss of faith among the young to Kaliyuga, the age of degradation. 

And there were rumors, the choicest Indian weapon used to pull down people. Swami’s disciple community was no exception and rumor was the protocol used for criticizing one another. It was a headless monster whose origin could never be found, but it always succeeded in conveying the intended criticism. Raghavan, was a frequent target. The earliest among them was that he was arrogant, arrogant about everything. There were also criticisms that his modernization initiatives had diluted the religion.  Swami wouldn’t bother about them, as he felt he had done enough to appease the traditionalists. But he became wary when told that Raghavan nursed a secret ambition of succeeding him. There was no evidence to back this claim, he was never disloyal to him. But off late, his failing health and a stumbling son had put his family legacy and its future always on his mind. The rumor would begin to appear credible whenever Swami listened to Raghavan speak in public during sermons after his son had finished his turn. Many disciples would plead him to migrate to the city for health reasons, but he wouldn’t. He couldn’t be one of them. He had to remain separate and special till his death. 

December, especially the latter fortnight of the month is a time of piety and rigor in many Hindu schools of thought. Disciples spend the days mostly in prayer and sermons, in anticipation of the opening of the door to the god’s abode. The Hindu calendar has a specific day in the month of January which marks this door-opening event and many temples have a door through which devotes pass through, mimicking the soul’s entry into god’s abode which is supposed to assures them of salvation. During this time of the year Swami delivered sermons every day at the monastery of the sub-caste he belonged. He had done this without a break for as long as he could remember, but his failing health prevented him from traveling to the city this year. He conveyed his inability to sermon to the seer of the monastery beforehand. There was a special protocol of communication between these men of religious stature and it mimicked diplomacy. Swami dispatched a letter to the seer which had a template: prayer, salutations and the message in the traditional dialect to convey his inability and waited for a reply. The seer was expected to reply back in the same template requesting Swami’s son to deliver the sermons in his absence. The reply came, and it had enquiries about his health and seer’s prayers for his speedy recovery. But there was no mention of the replacement. The seer was rumored to be jealous of the Swami. They enjoyed a civil relationship in public, but he had an axe to grind. Swami was accused of not doing enough for the monastery despite his family’s wealth and he had resorted to rumors rather than direct criticism of Swami or his family. Slyly he dispatched a letter requesting Raghava to sermon in absence of the Swami. Raghava saw this a great honor, a sure shot to get rid of his taint and seal his legacy as the “respectable and religious man”. But first, Swami had to agree to this. In his mind, there would not be much doubt about this, he was capable, had good knowledge of the scriptures to deliver the sermons and was older than Swami’s son who was still, a work in progress. Raghava traveled to Swami’s home with the seer’s request. 

His blindness would dawn on him within moments of seeing the anger on the Swami’s face. He, an ordinary man, a man with a debauched father had dared to compete with a man of higher birth, a man whose forefathers were carried in palanquins.  Like a cornered animal the Swami railed at him and accused him of disloyalty.  Raghava would plead forgiveness, but he was not to be forgiven. His act was not as simple as competing with Swami’s son, it was the case of competing with Swami’s legacy. Both men, allies till date, had lived their lives with a burden and were eager to be relieved of it. Unexpectedly they were at odds and there could be only one winner. Raghava left Swami’s house mournfully, his dream shattered awaiting his punishment. He wasn’t the nondescript householder any more, neither was he the disciple. 

Swami, despite his health, traveled to the city with his son. Diplomacy was set aside and seer was asked to confirm his son as the replacement. The seer was placated by a generous donation to the monastery and Swami’s son would deliver the December sermons. But the seer was devious, and he would start a rumor that Swami sought an entitlement for his son much like a person of lower caste seeks reservation in government jobs. The news spread like wildfire and left Swami embarrassed. He couldn’t do much about the seer. The seer, wasn’t a prominent figure of the caste, but within his monastery was a mini-god. Swami consoled himself that his actions were necessary. To recover ground, he would organize a series of sermons by his son in all the important monasteries of the caste. These sermons were high on orthodoxy, shrill and playing to the traditionalist base, but lacked the subtlety of the Swami. The traditionalists were necessary to confirm his son as his successor, other caste members were expected to accept the recommendation of these traditionalists. In few months, Swami’s son was actively lecturing at mutts and religious functions of the caste. There were murmurs that the son was not as a worthy successor to his father, that, he lacked wit and subtlety of his father and could not be the spiritual guide of his caste. The audience at public sermons dwindled and he was left with only the traditionalists who were old and grey.  Swami, already in bad health could not come to terms with this recession in his family’s prestige. He was aware of his son’s limitations, but always thought that his coaching and coaxing would see him through. A man who had great belief in greatness of birth started doubting it. Raghava’s memory started haunting him frequently and at times he wished that he had him as his son. Raghava deserved a father like him. Raghava’s memory turned into guilt and it pained Swami a lot. 

It was inevitable, Swami was hospitalized, but he wouldn’t stay there for long and was brought home. Everyone knew his days were numbered and there was a steady stream of disciples to his house to get his blessings. He would go through the motions with them. With a few who were deemed close to him, he enquired about Raghava. He  never expressed openly a desire to meet him, but an enquiry was sufficient for the disciples to discern his intent. Raghava came. 

It took him moments to understand that he was forgiven, like the few moments it took to understand Swami’s rage when they last met. Both were stoic, Swami placed his hand on Raghava’s head when he sat at his feet, just like the facebook picture, which Raghava had left unchanged. It was as though he was showering his blessings in full force on him to atone for his guilt. Raghava was again the disciple, or perhaps more, the son he never had. 

Swami died a couple of days later and was cremated amidst chanting of sacred verses. Traditionalists and his disciples assembled for the funeral and paid their respects. At the end of 14 days of funeral ceremonies, the son was declared as the new Swami, but the actual anointment ceremony would take place after a year in mourning. His closest disciples would say that Swami’s soul left for god’s abode only after the anointment. The new Swami would speak of the greatness of his father and forefathers during his sermons, much like the Swami during his sermons. 

Raghava withdrew. He did not appear much in public and confined himself to his house. Most of his time was spent in prayer and chanting of verses. People whom knew him, were struck by his reticence when they met him. He was cordial, but declined any invitations to speak or be part of a new project to spread Swami’s message. They would say that he was waiting for his death, that, he was above worldly illusions, and hence a saint. He was in good health and lived for many years, almost forgotten in the disciple circles were it not for the December incident. Raghava never bothered to clarify, he even no longer cared for ridding himself of the “taint”. In his death they extolled him as Raghava the saint, not the householder, not the disciple. Swami’s son would visit his house and pay his respects to the family. His relatives and siblings came, and there was no shadow of his father when they condoled his death. 