From: Aravind Jayan <aravindjayanpillai@gmail.com>
Date: 18 August 2015 at 11:15
Subject: Submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

*Bio*: Aravind Jayan, is a student of journalism at the Symbiosis International University, Pune. He was born and brought up in Kerala. His work has appeared in Open Magazine, Sahitya Akademi's Indian Literature, Nether, Reading Hour, Helter Skelter, The Bombay Literary Magazine, Tehelka and The Hindu. He edits fiction at The Bombay Review. 

*Trickle* 

Someone plays Round Midnight by Thelonious Monk. Now I don’t listen to a lot of jazz, but I have heard just enough to recognize Round Midnight. This is a Christy Baron version though; and I know this only because Pratika tells me so. 

Well, she doesn’t actually tell me that. 

When the song comes on she says she likes Christy Baron 

We are sitting across each other at some coffee bar. We did not plan to meet but end up at the same place at a strange hour.  My head is on my fist; hers is in the proper place. She hasn’t changed at all. Maybe she’s a little thinner now – she was always thin in school- and her eyes are sunken, as if all she did between then and now was read. Her wrists though, are as bony and elegant as ever. The kind of wrists you want to see handling cutlery. She has the kind of mouth you want to see saying cutlery too. 

We don’t small talk. I don’t know if we have the time for it . Maybe she’d have done the hihowdoyoudo dance if I had; but to me she looks too tired for that sort of thing. 

“Stop for coffee on your way out?” I ask. 

She smiles weakly, tells me she hasn’t been sleeping too well. She can’t remember the last time she rolled over in bed and it was morning. “You have changed though,” she says. “I like that kind of suddenness.” 

Then she elaborates: “When you have stayed awake for as long as I have, everything becomes boring. Take today morning for instance. I didn’t just wake up to find the ground wet, I knew it was pouring all through the night. The turning of the day itself becomes so suffocating.” 

“Like slow cars on a highway?” 

“Yes. Gradients.” 

The table we sit at is outdoors and far away from the counter which is inside a small open shed with a little blue fan and a cheap chandelier. The fan is on and spinning slowly; the chandelier too is lit but a few bulbs are out. There’s no one around to take our order. As a matter of fact, the place is deserted. 

“Is that why it feels like I’m seeing a ghost?” 

“Maybe so,” she says after a while, “But to me it’s more like being immortal.” 

Her words are carefully measured, the way you add sugar to your coffee. 

I light two cigarettes and give her one. She takes a deep drag, almost as if she’s sucking in someone’s soul. Nothing comes out though, or maybe I’m distracted by her wrists once again - gracefully arched as she holds the cigarette - and her fingernails too, which are long and unpainted. 

My wife Parvathi and I are drinking her father’s whisky when I tell her all this. We are in the single room on the third-floor of his house going through the library. She’s sitting in one of those foldable deck-chairs, looking through a hardbound picture book titled ‘Kerala: The Definitive Images’ by Günter Salamance. I’m sitting shirtless on the floor, soaking in the cold marble. It’s a little after three on a Sunday; and the French window lets in a nice breeze. 

Not that the window or the wind know what time or day it is. But together they manage to function quite nicely. 

Parvathi listens to me without a word, looking now and then at her picture book, turning a page here and there. Then she ventures a question: ‘when was this?’ she asks. 

I think hard about it. 

“A long time ago,” I say, “Before I met you. Maybe in college.” 

I realise then that she doesn’t want a date or time-period; what she wants is a clarification of detail. So, I say: “It was night time. “ 

Then I get my shaving kit from the bag and a mug of water from the basin, stand in front of the small mirror and start working on my beard. 

In the cafe we are surrounded by little trees the size of goblins, and plenty of creepers winding on wooden poles. There are a few larger trees around us as well, that form a canopy overhead. At times it feels like we are sitting inside a green-house and at other times in a sort of bird sanctuary, especially when I hear the flapping of large wings close behind me. There are times within this short period when I look up see only a single patch of sky though the trees; and during these I feel as though we are in an astronomical tower. That’s when Round Midnight starts playing – when I’m looking up-, and she says she likes Christy Baron. 

Across the road is Hotel Lemon Tree International. The little light that falls on our side of the cafe – though the cafe is for all intents and purposes entirely ours - comes from the large electrified lettering of the hotel and a few lit lamps by its side. From where we sit we can see its glass doors and the large lobby with white couches and a crystal fountain. Though I can’t read it, I know the soft letters on door spell ‘pull’. 

I’m mesmerised by the sight of the towering hotel issuing this tall command. She is too, I think. 

‘It’s a full moon today, and it’ll be high tide now,’ I think she says. She’s talking about a different kind of pull, I realise. There are all kinds of pulls. 

Between that word and her frailty, I feel brutal; I could reach over and break her neck if I were so inclined. Her sadness on the other hand is overwhelming; it could very well enter me and turn me inside out like a cotton t-shirt. 

While sitting there I think about some old things, or rather she makes me think about them. Like how back in school, I wanted nothing more than to catch the girls dance team right after a performance. 

It was a strange fancy, but a solid one. 

I wasn’t yet acquainted with my reasons, but it was clear to me that there was a largess of vitality to be had in this way. If someone were to ask me then what I expected to see, a clear answer would have evaded me. Of course in my mind the result had some form, but that too was covered in a shroud of shame and confusion.  It wasn’t about being a peeping tom; I could surmise that much from my lack of eloquence and abundance of guilt. In fact, in a bid to put it out of my mind, I had shortened it to something like this: what I wanted to see was something others weren’t allowed to. 

It was only later though, in tenth grade, while standing backstage with a stranger’s guitar slung on my back, waiting for the dance team to exit stage that I thought full well about the secrecy of what I sought. 

Through the walls, I could hear the muffled music of an old folk song. A few words would drift by every now and then: 

Fjord 

Shrine 

Paper, I think. Kadalssu. Or  it could be sea. Kadalu 

The backstage area was painted a sickly shade of green with only a few 50-watt bulbs here and there. Somebody would walk by once a while and I would freeze against the wall. They would be teachers sometimes with their heads bent over clipboards, but more often than not they would have their faces painted deep red or black or have them caked with white make-up. 

I felt then, standing against the dim light there, that I was going to be trapped in this sticky awareness forever. That it would be impossible to share any of this. Maybe I could explain it in part, or talk about the circumstances leading up to it, but I wouldn’t be able to it tell it whole. The whole as such would be uncontainable and never-ending; this was simply the entrance into incompletion. 

Muffled applause ensued when the song ended. There was a terrible rush backstage as trees and rhinos, pre-historic birds and cave men stampeded past me toward the stage area. After them, there was nothing and for a short while only silence. Then the girls walked by, covered in bright sarees, thick, embroidered and worn in complexity. Their faces were glistening, and their mouths were half-open – as if someone somewhere had paused them in mid-sentence; I expected them to sigh. Their gait seemed uniform, slow, mannered and punctuated by the chimes of their anklets.  If their hearts were beating too fast, I couldn’t hear them over mine – and if they were panting – their chests rising up and down, I couldn’t see it through my embarrassment. 

The last girl to walk by had had her hand cut against broken bangles. Her palm was bloody, and her face was cringed and her eyes were wet; nothing escaped her though. I knew then that I couldn’t stand there any longer. 

“For a while I thought that girl was you – the one bleeding. I don’t know why I thought that” I tell Pratika. 

“No,” she says, “that wasn’t me. “ 

“I suppose it was a thought that formed later then - over the years.” 

“Maybe so. But I don’t think that was me.” She looks at her palm and inspects it for gashes. 

“Do you dance now?” 

We don’t know if we are still waiting for someone to take our order.  The counter is empty. There are a bunch of stacked bills on it and a ledger with its pages flapping softly under the fan. 

“I feel sleepy,” Pratika says. “Maybe it’s the humidity. With the plants and trees – and the quiet over here.” 

“Yes,” I say, “it’s the plants.” As if I’ve been studying them for years and years. 

I notice Pratika slouching, looking over her shoulders to the LemonTree International now. There’s a couple standing there at the edge of the road against the bright lobby light. Behind them everything else is still the same- the glass doors, the large reception with the white couches, the bubbling crystal fountain. They only have a small trolley bag which the man holds; the woman instead holds him. They must be waiting for a taxi, I think, after checking out. 

I wait for Pratika to say something. I don’t know the shape her words are going to take though. It’s a little like looking up at an empty sky and having to imagine clouds as they should be. 

When she finally speaks, it’s to say that she’s leaving, that she’s going back to her hostel to get some sleep. The couple too has disappeared; probably walked further down the street. 

The room smells of Old Spice now and there is shaving foam on my chest and shoulders. Parvathi pours me another glass of whiskey as soon as I stop speaking. She throws me a towel, moves over to the window and pulls the curtains close. She comes over and plants a kiss on my neck. 

The whole house is quiet now.  Something that’s been trickling pauses. 