From: Abhishek Bhatt <mail.bhatt@gmail.com>
Date: 14 September 2015 at 12:20
Subject: submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

BIO 

Abhishek is an award-winning advertising and media professional. Born in India, he stumbled upon Singapore in 2006 after a series of glorious missteps and has never left since. After stints with Ogilvy & Mather, Mumbai, Star TV & Sony Pictures, Abhishek is presently working as Head of Creative Solutions in CNBC – APAC and trying hard to determine which shiny new technology is going to put him out of job. 

SPECTACULUS HX3 

by Abhishek Bhatt 

The biggest new release of that year was a murder mystery. Three minutes into the movie, a cherubic cat named Nina is horrifically killed on camera for a snuff film. The next eighty-seven minutes are spent on giving equally incriminating evidence against three prime suspects who could have been behind the camera. At the ninety-first minute, we see the three suspects at a coffee shop, seen together on screen for the first time in the movie. A poignant scene made even more important by a soft voice-over cajoling movie patrons to choose their cat killer. This could be done by merely looking at one of the three for a minimum of “five uninterrupted seconds.” The coffee shop scene lasts for a full two minutes giving enough time for all to deliberate and make their choice. The movie ends as an unsolved mystery if you don’t choose either of the three by gazing at them for five seconds, uninterrupted. If you do choose one, the sensor on your Spectaculus HX3 headset will gauge your line of sight and send the result to Spectaculus HX3 Smart Server who then would promptly beam you the matching version of the movie’s last reel; validating the person you chose as the most despicable villain of the year or, going by some online reviews, the entire decade! 

This was Agami’s third viewing. Having picked the guy with the chipped-nail-on-the-left- index-finger as his latest suspect, Agami was as content with this version’s smooth and logical conclusion as with the previous two. That he saw all three versions at his favorite theatre only added to his contentment. Agami liked RexMEDIA Centre for its latest UltraDef-24.1 NodeStar technology, but more so for its generous spacing between two chairs. With four feet left-right and three feet front-back spacing, it was the best in town. Other less spacious theatres forced Agami to press hard on his headset in order to focus whenever a chuckle or shriek went off in a nearby seat. But deep down, he had a secret admiration for such exuberance in people. An admiration for the ability to let go and express oneself without inhibition, a stark contrast to his own mortal fear of being judged. Agami sat in those dark halls, liberally moistening each kernel of popcorn before munching so as to minimize the crunching sound, lest someone cast a disapproving glance and send him on a spiraling guilt trip. 

That’s that then, he thought on his way out, three versions done. ‘Money well spent’, he posted. ‘Four stars’, he tweeted. ‘Yo!’, he yo’ed and ‘/\’, he respected on his social channels. Just when he was about to call his girlfriend to discuss the movie at length, he received a message. Hey patron it said, hope you enjoyed all versions of #chooseyourkiller. Do come back for a special screening of the latest version to be released tomorrow at 11am. In this groundbreaking new version, you don’t have to actively choose a killer. The new updated Spectaculus HX3 headset with its in-built electroencephalogramHX3 will now monitor your brain activity through the course of Act One & Two and through our Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation HX technology -- which, as the name suggests, uses electromagnetic induction to stimulate the brain from outside -- your brain then will be able to send out your choice directly to our servers, enabling a smooth flow towards Act Three. In short, sit back, relax, and give thought a free rein. Explore the deepest recesses of your brain. Find out how well you know *you!* 

There was a thirty percent mark up on price, steep but manageable. Agami did a quick mental calculation and concluded that his plans to buy the limited edition Vonnegut doodles will  have to wait. He politely excused himself from lunch date with his girlfriend in order to free up the schedule. Sorry darling my tennis lessons got rescheduled, he lied, immediately realizing that the lie was as inadequate as it was unnecessary. But what was done was done and so he switched off his phone’s location tracker before leaving the house next morning in order to go untraceable. Yet another wrong move bound to raise suspicion, he noted in quiet panic while waiting for the movie to start. 

By middle of ACT I he made up his mind on Suspect B being the cat killer. Approaching ACT II he determined that Suspect C was the killer based on fresh, unequivocal evidence. The last reel started and -- to his surprise – showed Suspect A as the despicable cat killer. How could this be? He thought he had thought Suspect C. He looked around the hall and everyone seemed satisfied with the results. It could be that he was too preoccupied with the danger of being caught lying to his girlfriend and his mind was muddled. Unsatisfied, he went back to the counter and bought ticket for the next show. This time he chose Suspect B with crystal clarity but the movie ended with Suspect C as the killer. Back to the counter. The day’s last show was to start in forty-five minutes so he went for a walk. Calm down Agami, it must be an anomaly. Relax, it’s not a test. All you have to do is think straight. *Sit back, relax and give thought a free rein. *He feels better after the walk, treats himself with overpriced nachos just to get in the mood. 

He stopped overanalyzing the clues and lived in the moment through the course of the movie. B, C, B, A, C, B. It didn’t matter. This is what he thinks based on by-the-second evidence. *Give thought a free rein. *So what if I am caught lying, so what if the doctor gave mother six months, so what if I am an illegal immigrant, to hell with the snide racial jokes, to hell with the heat, the deluge, the war, thinning hair, I am here to watch a movie and perform a simple task – Think. And I think the killer is Suspect B and so be it. 

That’s impossible Mr. Agami, our technology is perfect, said the Spectacular HX rep who looked like a cross between a scientist and a gamer. He then proceeded to show Agami six months worth trial results that they conducted before going live in market and the results showed a hundred percent success. *Ah* wait he said to Agami smugly when the secretary came in to hand a fresh bunch of papers, today’s real world screening results are in. All patrons were served the last reel based exactly on who they thought the killer was. Zero discrepancies, except of course, you. 

At the parking lot Agami thought he saw a rat beneath his car. I think I think I saw a rat beneath my car but who is to say that is correct, he thought. I think I love Jana, always have, but it could be a thought trick. There were certainly moments when he absolutely hated his cat. Maybe I am being sold a ruse all this while. Maybe there is another being in there who’s calling the shots. Agami was reminded of his times at the temple when he had hardcore sex in mind while praying. He struggled to keep those thoughts away but they would involuntarily take center stage the moment he put his hands together and closed eyes. Maybe that was the real me trying to creep out at an opportune moment, he pondered, maybe that was the person who chose Suspect C when I chose B. 

In the days that followed, Agami was convinced that he was living as a person of social norms and not as himself. He took an oath to live by the inner himself which was basically the opposite of what he was doing till then. He stopped visiting his mother, broke off with the girlfriend, ceased taking a shower and so on. When friends questioned, he would announce that he won’t be living based on people’s expectations of him and that this has been going on for too long and started messing with his brain, it has to stop. When humans started living with a social contract it seemed a fair idea, he explained. When villagers complained about the monks felling *saka *trees, it was Buddha who ordered the monks to stop and give way to social order. We are living this compromise for centuries, continued Agami, a compromise between the best of all--which is to do injustice and not be punished--and the worst of all, which is to suffer injustice without the power of retaliation. Now that is an unnatural way of living, proclaimed Agami while climbing on the couch. We need to give our thoughts a free rein and let actions follow else all we are doing is living double lives. If the monks felt like cutting trees they should have let them and let nature take its course. Let there be freedom to plunder and defend, to rape and murder, let there be war of all against all, let it all end because what is all this worth if we are unable to think and do, what we* want* to think and do. We might as well be lab rats concluded Agami in a much higher pitch than the one he started with and proceeded to get down from the couch and defecate on his friend’s Turkish carpet. 

It was this new habit of open defecation that led people to assume Agami killed his cat when it was found hanging from the fan in his bedroom. He was arrested in the midst of a free thought seminar he was conducting. His followers, a considerable number by now, chipped in with donations to secure a good criminal defense lawyer. The prosecutors got a beeline of witnesses to testify ninety-eight instances when Agami defecated in public without reason or warning. That’s preposterous, Agami had argued at one instance when he lost his cool, all that shitting was him exercising free thought and had nothing to do with cat’s death. There were exhibits from defense that proved Agami’s love for his cat. Family photos, videos, gifts, surveillance footage, social feeds of the cat and Agami demonstrated their close relationship. The court sketcher and stenographer worked on their networked machines taking all into account. Then came another round of witnesses from prosecution where all recalled instances when Agami displayed hatred towards the cat. This group included Agami’s girlfriend. Agami felt uneasy but quietly confident about his defense against all witnesses until he spotted the Spectaculus HX rep in the room and felt naked in his presence. Here’s the man who knows the inner workings of my brain better than I do, what data is he sitting on, is he going to lay it all out in the courtroom, such questions kept Agami preoccupied for the rest of the trial. 

But the rep never took to the witness box. It was time for jury to begin deliberation. The bailiff brings out a portable projector and wires it up to the court sketcher’s network. The stenographer is done putting up the finishing touches and begins transfer. Lights go out. Agami recognizes his first photograph as a baby, the watery dark eyes now staring at everyone in the courtroom. Superimposed on that photo is the title #AgamiDeliberations. An impressive montage of Agami’s early life follows, part video footage part social feeds and CGI, all seamlessly weaved in. The court audience reaches out for their Spectaculus HX headsets placed below each seat. 

END 