From: Veena Muthuraman <veena.m@gmail.com>
Date: 3 September 2015 at 16:41
Subject: Submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Scenes from a Scandal 

One: Aachi spots an opportunity 

Terraced mansions that stretch from one street to the next.  

Wide courtyards with carved pillars made of Burma teak.  

Belgian mirrors in the bedrooms, Italian marble on the verandahs, hand made Aathangudi flooring inside the house.  

Garages that are often mistaken for old stables.  

A Chettinad mansion may well be the ultimate lap of luxury, but then there are a few things that the marketing brochures forget to mention, Kanaka Aachi thought to herself, as she read the description of an old friend's house in a nearby town, now converted to a home-stay. They always forget to mention that the courtyards in these houses often open into tiny, windowless rooms. Bathrooms are invariably outside the house in the far end of the backyard. The staircases are high and narrow, and the steps are far apart from each other making it an impossible climb for anyone past the age of fifty. A Chettinad house is indeed paradise, but only for someone who doesn't have to live in it for a lifetime. 

Aachi surveyed her dominion from her office, a room that she had managed, with great difficulty, to convert into a functional space to meet her requirements - natural light, fresh air, a desk with a computer and couple of chairs. This mansion has been her home for more than half a century now. She had left the house for a short two years many decades ago to start a new and exciting life in the Land of the Free, but that had ended in tragedy. She returned home, grown up and jaded, the first divorcee in Rayavaram town. 

Her father, overly fond of his daughter as the tongues wagged, left the mansion to her in his will. Vikraman took it well, all considered. After all, what did he need this house for other than the occasional wedding? Having his sister here meant that it would be well-maintained, unlike the other houses in town, and he could bring his family to experience the rustic life in relative comfort once every couple of years. For her part, Kanaka Aachi wished she hadn't inherited this house. A simple one bedroom house with a small garden would have served her much better, but this mansion was hers now, and she was duty bound to live in it, and spend most of her hard-earned money towards its upkeep. Her next project was a bedroom in the ground floor - she wouldn't be able to climb up those stairs much longer. The cash would materialise this year if her luck held. Real estate had slowed down in the past several months but it hadn't hit her hard yet. Her thoughts turned to work. 

There was significant interest in the land close to the town bus stand, adjacent to where the Moorthy brothers were building their shopping complex, the first of its kind in Rayavaram. The price of the land had gone up three-fold in the past year. Aachi knew the land owner – the retired schoolmaster from Ayyanarpatti. Just yesterday, she had been to the village for his daughter's wedding. He would get a good price for it, and he could probably do with the cash. If not, she could always interest him in reinvesting elsewhere. She unlocked her phone and dialled. 

 

Two: After the Wedding 

Siva Master sat in his thinnai in Ayyanarpatti contemplating the aftermath of the wedding, almost certainly the last that this house would host. The bride and groom had left for Chennai once all the ceremonies and formalities were completed. But the house was still strewn with flowers and turmeric-coated rice grains used to bless the newly weds. The cleaning crew would arrive any moment now. A teenage boy was busy untying the tube lights from the light poles. The bright red shamiana would remain in place for another couple of days along with the plantain trees that adorned the wooden poles holding up the canopy. The chef's helpers had left, but the chef was still in Ayyanarpatti, drinking with the young ones in the mango grove. His dues had yet to be paid. 

“Neru, come in. You look like a bus conductor with that bag under your arm!”. Siva Master teased his friend and invited him inside. 

“Just like the poor bus conductor, none of this money is mine!” 

Neru handed the large leather bag to Siva and sat down next to him. He opened his long register that held the accounts for the wedding. 

“You count the cash, I will do the totals and let us see if the account tallies. I was writing down names and gifts non-stop for nearly three hours yesterday. I reckon you have a decent collection here.” 

Neru was referring to the wedding gifts, in the form of money or gold, that guests had brought the day before. A lawyer by profession, Neru had the unofficial charge of collection and accounting for all weddings in Ayyanarpatti. 

“What you give, you get back”. Siva replied, philosophically. 

He opened the bag, took out the first set of currency notes. He wet his index finger with his tongue and started counting. Neru read out names and numbers aloud as went through his register. 

“Chandran – 501 

Muthu – 1001 

Selva – 301, a padi of rice 

Mari – A gold ring...didn't specify the weight” 

“I gave 4 grams ring for his daughter's wedding last year, he would have done the same”. Siva said and continued counting. 

An hour later, their accounting was complete, and there were neat piles of cash set aside for catering, lighting, furniture, cleaning, and miscellaneous. Siva placed the gold jewellery in a separate bag. 

“The gold goes to Chithra. I will give it to her when she comes home for Deepavali”, he said. 

“Why wait so long? I hope you are going to see her before that”. 

“I don't think so. There is enough for me to do here. The kids come home for classes every day and there are a few other things I need to take care of”. 

Neru felt sorry for the schoolmaster. His wife had died during childbirth when his only daughter was five. His parents took care of Chithra but they passed away a few years ago. Now that Chithra had left for her in-laws' house, Siva Master would be totally alone in this large house. Despite his bravado, Neru knew that the Master was going to be very lonely. 

Siva continued oblivious to his friend's thoughts. “I am thinking of farming some of the land that has been lying barren for years now”. 

“There is a reason they are barren, Master. Good luck with finding farm labour!” 

Before Siva could reply, his phone rang. 

“Kanaka Aachi!” He sounded surprised. 

 

Three: A daughter is troubled 

Chithra was settling down well in Chennai. Her husband was kind and gentle, and had agreed to let her take up a job at a private college close to home. Her in-laws were like in-laws everywhere, and she worked around them as best as she could. She thought of her father less frequently than she had thought she would, which made her feel all the more guilty. She made it a point to call him twice a day, and became worked up if he didn't answer, which seemed to occur surprisingly often. He was busy with tuitions, or running errands in town, or he was with Neru uncle. Initially, Chithra thought her father was trying to hide his loneliness from her, but he sounded truly happy and content over the phone. She knew him well enough to know that he wasn't faking it. She was a tad disappointed that he seemed to be doing so well without her. 

Then there was this strange talk the other day of selling the land next to the bus stand in Rayavaram. He had said it fetched a good price and he was going to reinvest the proceeds from the sale. It hadn't occurred to Chithra until then that her father could be in financial trouble, and she chastised herself for not having caught it earlier. He had spent extravagantly on her wedding and it was quite possible that he was in need of money. But when she tried to broach the subject with him and asked him whether she should speak to her husband, he had become indignant and defensive. She didn't push it. Her wedding was in its honeymoon period and she wanted to keep it that way as long as possible. But her father's atypical behaviour was making her uneasy, and she decided to have a chat with Neru uncle to put her mind to rest. 

 

Four: Councillor Muthu harbours a nagging suspicion 

Councillor Muthu was in town to inspect the new shopping complex that was to be inaugurated in a few weeks. Thanks to him, a mid level party functionary, an ex-MLA no less, had kindly agreed to grace the occasion and cut the ribbon on the auspicious day. Muthu visited the site once a week to ensure that the arrangements for the inauguration were going as per plan. 

“The stage has to be moved here, this is better for the cameras. I will make sure that the posters of the leader reach you within the week. They have to be plastered on all the walls...” 

“But...” 

“Do you think he inaugurates minor shopping complexes? The only reason he agreed to do this was because I personally requested him on your behalf. If the arrangements aren't as per his specifications....” 

“Don't worry Muthu. Everything will be as you want it. Come back in a week and you will see for yourself”. The owners reassured him. 

Muthu gave them a few more directions and took his leave. He walked to his bike and was about to kick-start it when he noticed a familiar face behind the building site. Kanaka Aachi, the town's only lady broker, seemed to holding what looked like a skipping rope looped around her neck. A moment later, she raised it high and skipped! Muthu rubbed his eyes. She did it again but this time, she hopped. Next to her, a man who was a double of the venerable Siva Master was clapping his hands and laughing like a five-year old boy. Perplexed, he walked towards them. Kanaka Aachi and Siva Master noticed him, and looked at each other, visibly embarrassed. 

“Hello Muthu”, Siva Master called out to him. “What brings you here?” 

“Arrangements for the inauguration”. He pointed to the shopping complex. “Former MLA is coming to cut the ribbon, and there is no one else to supervise everything”, he said. 

As he got closer, he got a good look at Kanaka Aachi's skipping rope. It happened to be a measuring tape. She noticed him looking at it and blushed deeply. 

“We are waiting for the surveyors to come and measure the plot”. She offered an explanation. 

“They were supposed to be here half an hour ago. Always late”, Siva added. Muthu looked at him in surprise. He had no idea that the modest schoolmaster owned land outside the village. 

“Master, you own this land?” 

Siva nodded. “I bought it decades ago when Chithra's mother was alive. Kan..Aachi has found a buyer and I am going to sell it”, he answered. Muthu looked at Aachi suspiciously before turning to Siva. 

“How much are you selling it for?” 

“Around a lac per cent”, Aachi answered for Siva. Muthu was astonished. 

“But Master, you should get twice as much for this land”. He walked closer to Siva and lowered his voice. “You can't trust this woman. Leave this to me”, he whispered. Siva shook his head. 

“Thanks, but I have already accepted the advance. I can't go back now”, he said. Muthu looked from Siva to Kanaka Aachi and back again. 

“Sure, sure. I understand”. 

 

Five: Nithya drops off a few books 

A few days later, on a toasty Pankuni evening, Young Nithya stopped by the Master's house to drop off a few library books he had asked for. Siva liked to read, and Nithya was always borrowing books for him from her college library. She was glad that someone read them before the termites got to them. Also, she had a soft corner for the school master, he had been instrumental in her managing to secure admission in a halfway decent college. She felt it was her duty to provide him some well-needed company once in a while, especially since his daughter had left home. 

As she parked her bicycle and went inside the house, she was surprised to see that there were only a handful of children leaving his house at that time of day. 

“Have you given them all a holiday, Master?”, she asked. 

Every child of school-going age in Ayyanarpatti came to Siva in the evenings for tuitions. It didn't matter whether they went to the local government school (which hardly anyone did nowadays), or one of the many expensive private schools in town. The parents knew they would learn more from the schoolmaster. 

“Well, some of them have stopped coming”, Siva said, unlike his usual self, his voice guarded. 

“Why, is there a new master in our village?”, Nithya was surprised. Nothing happened in this village without she being aware of it, or so she wanted it to be. 

“I don't know of any new Master. But does this mean you haven't been warned about coming to see me?” 

“Why...Oh”. A bulb seemed to go on inside Nithya, and she tapped her head hard. 

“Now I know why everyone is so curious about those books I bring you from the library. I thought Ayyanarpatti had suddenly turned literary!” 

“That would be the day”, Siva said, smiling. 

“I wouldn't worry about all this Master. The kids will be back once their marks go down this year. You just wait”. 

“Marks aren't as important as morals”. 

Nithya shrugged. “I wouldn't know much about either. They are both terribly overrated, in my opinion. I need to be off Master”. 

Siva watched her leave, thoughtfully. That girl was precocious in a weird way and one never knew what to make of her. But he was glad that she didn't think ill of him and that gave him an inkling of hope. Perhaps Chithra would understand. Love has no age, after all. 

 

Six: Ayyanarpatti has a visitor 

Councillor Muthu turned around at the sound of a car turning into Upper Street. Aachi's old Maruti 800 was weaving its way through the main street. Muthu recognised Aachi's gaunt profile in the driver's seat but the car passed by too quickly for him to recognise anyone else. The car continued up the street but did not stop where he was expecting it to stop. It turned into one of the side lanes and disappeared from sight. 

“Did you see who was in the car?”, he asked Nithya, who was sitting on the steps of her house next door, a humungous book on Engineering Mechanics open on her lap. 

“Ah, the Councillor is blind!”, she mocked him. “Kumar's mother and sister”. 

Muthu ignored the taunt for the moment. He needed more information from her. 

“What are they doing with Aachi?” 

“How could the omniscient Councillor not know?” 

“Nithya, this is a serious matter. You have no idea how...” 

“Oh, shut up. Kumar is buying a house in town. Since he is back in America, his family had to go to the registrar office for registration”. 

Muthu's jaw dropped. 

“That pariah boy is buying a house? Where?” 

“An old Chettiar outhouse near the Durga temple”. 

“Why can't he buy in the village?” 

“Were you offering him your land?” 

“How did he...I will talk to him when he comes back. But what has that woman got to do with Kumar buying....oh, I see, she is the broker?” 

Nithya didn't bother to answer and Muthu continued. 

“She seems to be doing quite well. Just from our village, she has so many clients - Kumar and now Siva Master. The Master is completely under her spell, did you know that?”, Muthu asked her. Nithya pretended not to hear him. 

The Maruti 800 came back up the street. This time, it stopped in front of the Master's house. 

“Look, look where she is going. Shameless! I am going to call some people and put a full stop to this once and for all”. He walked to the neighbouring house. “Chandra anna!”, he shouted. 

“Full stop to what?”, Nithya asked. 

“You go inside. You shouldn't be watching this”. He waved her away. Nithya obediently got up and went inside. She continued to the far end of the narrow house and out into the backyard, ignoring her mother's calls. She deftly climbed up and down two fences before reaching Siva's backyard. She went up the steps and knocked on the door. 

Aachi left Siva's house a few minutes later. She started her car and drove slowly through the silent mob that had gathered on Upper Street. 

 

Seven: Chithra learns of her father's transgressions 

Chithra went shopping for the fourth time that day. “I forgot to get detergent”, she told her in-laws and stepped out. She needed some time to think and to take calls from Pappa and Kavita who were updating her with the latest. A very unlikely crisis was threatening to wreck her young life, and she had no idea who to believe or what to do. 

She didn't believe it at first when Kavita got around to telling her what had been the village headlines for the past several days. The villagers were vile, she thought. Since she wasn't around, they were giving her poor father a hard time. The Aachi was an acquaintance and a successful broker, he was meeting her to sell the land. 

How much land does he own that he has to live with the broker? 

That had hurt. Then, there was the story of how Aachi had visited their house in the village intending to stay the night, and had to be forcibly sent back. 

Shameful!  

Aachi was richer than all of them put together; there was no reason for her to take a fancy to her father. It didn't make any sense. 

Who knows what that wanton woman wants? We are the ones who have to be careful. 

And then Neru uncle had called her. He didn't mention Aachi but insisted that Chithra invite her father to Chennai, and get him to stay there for a little while. The Master's health wasn't what it used to be, he said, but Chithra knew better. 

What would she tell her husband and in-laws, she asked her friends. She couldn't tell them that they had to take her father in so that she could keep an eye on him and make sure he doesn't stray! 

Lie. Tell them you miss him.  

The kids have stopped going to him for tuitions. There is talk of more action. 

She didn't have a choice anymore. She had to get him out of Ayyanarpatti. 

 

Eight: A brother is concerned 

“Kanaka..” 

Vikraman was standing in his sister's office, pacing, looking outside on to the street. His coffee cup lay untouched on Aachi's desk. He had come to Rayavaram a couple of days ago for a wedding, and was due to leave for Chennai in an hour. He was dreading this conversation, but he couldn't possibly leave without having spoken to her. There were too many insinuations by too many people during the past two days that he just could not let it pass. He wasn't averse to his little sister having her own life but there was something called family honour that mattered, and there were some lines one didn't cross in this place. 

“What is it?”, Aachi asked him, nonchalantly. She knew what was coming, but she wasn't going to make it any easier for him. He was the one who has had the easy life. 

“You have done a wonderful job with the house”. 

“There is more to do. It is a money guzzler, this house”. 

Vikraman nodded. “But you have got to stop!” He blurted out. 

“Stop living in this house?” 

“No, your real estate business. You don't need it, we don't need it. I will take care of everything”. 

Aachi laughed uneasily. “But that is not what you said before. You have always wanted me to be independent, be my own master. You have even sent clients my way”. 

“But you aren't getting any younger”. 

“You are older than me and you run a conglomerate”. 

“That is different”. 

“How?” 

Vikraman sat down in a chair. There was no point in beating about the bush. He and his sister were always direct with one another and despite their differences, it had served them well over the years. This was no time to change it. 

“Who is this schoolmaster?” 

Aachi stared out of the window at nothing. What should she tell him? That she was in love? In all honesty, how much could she tell him without sounding like his adolescent daughter? 

“Kanaka, people talk in this place”, Vikraman continued. 

“People have always talked where I am concerned”. 

“But you don't need to go through this unnecessary gossip anymore. Tell you what? Come stay with us until this thing blows over”. 

“Until what blows over?” 

“We have our family honour to think of”. 

“Appa didn't think of family honour when I came back home battered. He wasn't ashamed of me”. 

“It wasn't your fault then”. 

“And now it is?” 

“Does this man, this schoolmaster, does he live here with you as..as they say?” 

“His house is in a nearby village. He lives there”. 

“And there is nothing between you two?” 

“I am selling his land for him”. 

“That is all there is to it?” 

“Vikraman, I am not your 15-year old daughter”. 

“Promise me you won't do anything silly” 

“Don't be ridiculous”. 

Vikraman sighed in relief and smiled at her. He drank up the coffee in one shot and got up to leave. He would be fine, Aachi concluded. He would get over it. Some day. 

 

Nine: The schoolmaster says good-bye 

Chithra pleaded with her father to stay with them in Chennai for a few weeks. Siva finally made up his mind to leave; there was no point in letting the poor girl worry unnecessarily. He had to make up his mind either way. He visited Neru to hand him a few documents and the spare keys to his house. He wasn't planning to be back for a while, and wanted to make sure Neru had everything that may be required in his absence. 

“I can take care of all this, not a problem. How long will you be gone?” He asked his friend. 

“I am not sure yet”. 

“Chithra would be glad to have you there. I..I really think this is best course of action given the situation here. The villagers are determined to keep away from you”. 

“After all I have done for their children!”, Siva exclaimed, bitterly. 

“All that is forgotten when something like this happens. I must admit I never thought you would fall into this sort of a trap...situation, but you haven't been yourself since the wedding”. 

“True, true. I have been a different person since the wedding”. He looked closely at Neru and continued. “I feel...young”. 

“We can't afford the luxury”, Neru said abruptly and Siva got up, as if on cue. 

“No, we can't”. 

 

Ten: The End 

The last time anybody saw Kanaka Aachi or Siva Master, together or separately, was on the last day of the month, outside the taluk registrar office. Nithya, playing hookey from college, happened to be passing through when she saw them come out of the office, holding hands. Before she could cycle over, they got into Aachi's car and drove away. An investigation by Councillor Muthu a few days later revealed a registered civil marriage. 
