From: Vineetha Mokkil <vmokkil@gmail.com>
Date: 20 October 2015 at 10:42
Subject: submission
To: Indira Chandrasekhar <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>

*Author bio*: Vineetha Mokkil is a writer currently based in New Delhi, India. She is the author of the collection, “A Happy Place and Other Stories” (HarperCollins, April 2014). She writes a monthly column on “ writing" for Litro Magazine, USA. Her stories have appeared in publications including the Santa Fe Writers Project Journal; The North East Review, The Missing Slate; and Cha: an Asian Literary Journal. Her first novel is in the pipeline. 

*Across the Water * 

*Vineetha Mokkil* 

There are two possible endings to her story: she gets out of the boat alive and breathes in the scent of a new day, a new life. Or she doesn’t. She knows this when she steps on the boat with her father, uncle, aunt and cousin. It is a gamble they have to take. 

The boat could ferry them across the sea or dump them in the freezing depths where fishes dive like synchronized swimmers. They will see Sameera flail around and drift past her without blinking. Schools of fish will watch her drown, perhaps not unkindly. She thinks of them as gentle creatures. The underwater world has rules: not even sharks kill for sport. 

The boat started up with a low, menacing growl. Sameera huddled under a blanket with her cousin, wishing she had not hidden in her bedroom two summers ago when her uncle had offered to give her swimming lessons. She had been a coward at 10 – afraid of the water, scared to step out of the house after dark, always on the lookout for an excuse to crawl into bed with her parents at night. “You’re not a baby now, baby” Ammi would laugh, gathering her in her arms. Ammi’s embrace was the warmest, safest place in the world. But that place now existed only in Sameera’s dreams. It was gone – smashed to rubble by gunfire and missiles and stealthy drones. 

Ammi and her friends were out in the backyard when the drone swooped down from the sky on a summer day. The sky glittered and there wasn’t a cloud in the blue. Ammi was out there plucking olives. She carried her favorite cane basket in her hand and once it was full, she would come back into the house, feed her friends lunch, and get around to pickling the olives. It started off as an ordinary day, that blood-soaked April noon. Nothing had prepared Abba and Sameera for it – no omens or signs, no word of warning from the Almighty, not even a dark cloud in the sky to announce the arrival of the murderous drone. 

“Are you ok?” Ahmed asked, peering into her face from under the blanket they shared. Her cousin was only a year older than her but he enjoyed playing big brother. “Sameera, don’t go out alone.” “Sameera, you talk too much for a girl. Don’t crack jokes. Watch your tongue.” Ahmed was always trying to boss her around. He won all the track and field championships at school but his grades were pathetic. At the end of every school term, his father compared Ahmed’s report card to Sameera’s and wept. “Don’t worry, uncle,” Sameera consoled him, making sure Ahmed was within earshot. “I’ll help him with his homework”. 

No wonder Ahmed hated her. His track and field glory was eclipsed by her stuffy academic feats. “If a missile hits our town, I’ll be the first to run to safety,” he liked to boast, pointing at the shiny trophies on his shelf. “Your nose will be buried in a book and you won’t even notice if the whole place blows up.” 

Ahmed couldn’t run to safety when the fighting started. There was nowhere to run to. The missiles pounded houses and offices and reduced their home to a ghost town. Gunshots rang out day and night like one long, endless boom. The air reeked of smoke and death. The stench was unbearable. Sameera thought she would go mad. The drone had snatched Ammi away and Abba had aged ten years since that day. His hair had turned white, his cheeks were sunken, and a hunted look was etched on his face permanently. He was lost without Ammi and Sameera felt him drifting farther and farther away. 

It was her uncle who decided it was time for them to leave. Abba was too confused by sorrow to see things clearly. He didn’t have the energy to make arrangements to get them on a boat. Everyone they knew was looking for a way out. There were too many desperate people around and too few boats. The agents gauged the measure of the town’s need and put a price on it. They were sure that if Sameera’s family didn’t cough up the exorbitant sum they demanded someone else would. The competition to get on the boats was cutthroat even if the whole town knew there was no guarantee of safety, not an iota of surety how the journey would end. 

Sameera found a way to get used to the boat’s sudden movements. She let her body move with it like she was dancing to a tune. The sea set the tune, the boat followed the beat, and Sameera gave in to the rhythm without complaining. She breathed in the wet, salty air and watched the stars draw strange patterns in the sky. Abba and her uncle were talking to each other in whispers. She couldn’t follow what they were saying but the sound of their voices was a familiar comfort. 

“So you think you’ll be first in class when we join a new school?” Ahmed hissed in her ear. He tugged at her necklace to get her attention. He had short, stubby fingers and he had forgotten to cut his nails before getting on the boat. 

“Don’t break it,” Sameera rolled her eyes at him. “It was Ammi’s favorite and she gave it to me”. She had seen Abba staring at the necklace when they stepped out of the house. He must remember how beautiful it used to look when it was clasped around Ammi’s slender neck. 

“Sorry,” Ahmed said in a gruff voice. He opened his mouth to say something more and then he shut up. Her cousin was a pain in the neck but he had his moments. He could be a decent human being one day if he worked a little harder on it. 

“Don’t worry,” Sameera said, keeping her eyes on the stars. “I’m going to be first in class. New school, old school - all the same to me” 

“New school, old school,” Ahmed mimicked her in a nasal voice. “I’m always first in class” 

“Shut up,” she said, poking him in the ribs. “Look at the stars up there. They’re so pretty” 

“Hmm…”he grunted, pulling up the blanket over his face. “I’m going to sleep” 

She fell asleep faster that she thought. It was almost daybreak when she opened her eyes. Pale light bounced off the water. She saw the shore in the distance – land, like a mirage, shimmering before her eyes. She wanted to lean over the railing and touch it. Grasp the future with both hands and make sure it never slipped away from her embrace. 

The boat started to rock from side to side like a sapling in the wind. “Don’t worry,” Ahmed shouted, raising his voice to outshout the wind. “It’s nothing. We’re almost there.” She reached out for his hand and they stood shoulder to shoulder, trying to keep their balance while the sea and the wind ganged up on the boat. The boat was too old to put up a fight.  It sank with a shudder. The water was so cold it made her scream when she hit it and the cry sucked all the air out of her lungs and she felt herself sinking fast. The sea was everywhere – above, below, and around her. Ahmed had drifted away from her and she tried to call out to him and to Abba and her uncle and aunt. The water muffled her cries. It dragged her down like a brutish hand she couldn’t fight. She kept thrashing around, looking for something to hold on to – passing flotsam, wreckage from the boat, a piece of rubble to keep her afloat till she was found. The water was ice cold, it left her numb. She couldn’t feel her arms and her feet. Her teeth were chattering. Her blood froze. 

“New school, old school,” Ahmed’s nasal chant rang out in her ears. She heard his voice, the sound of his laughter drifting towards her in the wind. 

“Ahmed?” she called out his name, hoping he could hear her. “Ahmed, is that you?” 

“Are you going to be first in class in the new school?” he asked, raising his voice to outshout the storm. 

“New school…old school…all the same to me,” she chanted, flapping her arms like a bird about to take flight. 

END 