From: debojit dutta <debojit.dutt@gmail.com>
Date: 11 January 2016 at 16:55
Subject: Submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Sharing is Caring by Debojit Dutta 

Grandmother died. I do not know how I feel saying that grandmother died. It should make me feel terrible thinking of all the things she had done for me. But she had not done much for me, except for spending afternoons with me at one point of my life, roleplaying in my childhood games. She was quite bad at it. Like when she would play a customer at my restaurant she never seemed like someone who waiters would serve food to. She would say “whoosh” while I would serve her food that contained no gravy. At times I wondered if she knew the difference between momos and soup. Perhaps I should remember her for those very moments of her stupidity. But I feel nothing. I think that makes me a terrible person. I am telling you I tried to feel, but it just does not happen. Like the day she was dying, and even before that, she had been wanting to meet me, but I was in the middle of this very boring game, boring you would call it, but I used to find it interesting then. I could play it throughout the day. It was a cricket game, this I did not want to tell you thinking you might call me a Neanderthal. A player of a cricket game that too on a PC is not quite a gamer, right? And if I tell you that it was a simulation game you would think of me even more unkindly. But it was fun watching Tendulkar score triple hundreds, even Anil Kumble could score a double. Your team could end up with a 1000 runs if you so wanted a draw. But back to my grandmother. I felt very irritated when I had to hibernate my computer just to go and see her because she was dying. I stood at her hospital door and pretended to feel some pain, guilting myself into it. In my head, I made myself see that I was slipping down the door. Like my back was slowly crawling down the frame of the door. And I had this extremely intense and dead look on my face. Like the world had fallen and now there were only shards of glass where I would live looking at my face in thousand directions and seeing my terrible, compassion-less self alone. No grandmother behind me.  No one saying “whoosh”. I had to come back home to watch porn and masturbate. Not like I had to, but the house was all empty as my parents were busy mourning at my uncle’s place. I also ate non-veg, although I wasn’t supposed to, I haven’t ever told anyone that. 

Frankly speaking, I don’t know how many people cared. It is unfair that this guilt of lacking in compassion always falls on me. Everyone who had gathered to mourn at my uncle’s was also busy dressing up for the commemoration. They seemed to have forgotten the reason for the occasion. This one cousin wanted me to carry Vaseline for her to the ceremony, as if she was the one with the driest lips at a death. I carried it anyway, how do I care. I am not like those who thought my intending to wear a white kurta-pajama to the funeral was just a Bollywood inspired show. But how do I care. These are the same people who had gathered at my uncle’s house for like two weeks prior to the dead person’s death. And now you could easily see that they did not give a fuck. They just wanted to look good. Frankly speaking, I never understood why they would stand there hovering around her. What were they waiting for? Now that she is dead she might not remember, but these people only came to her house when they needed a vacation. Like I am not sure many of them brought her up in their regular conversations anymore. Not her in this shape. Perhaps the old her and this story and that. How she would not be able to cook *bhindi torkari* and would burn dal, because she did not want to cook it in the first place. Things like that. But nothing about this silly, fragile, stupid her. I was thinking about that. I was thinking about her “whoosh”, but not saying anything. I was also not saying that she once fed me through my nose because it was dark and there was no electricity. But these people had to come. Because one night they came to know she had caught a viral fever that was not going anywhere, and that she might be dying. These people who had not laughed together in so many years and had no plans of doing so, decided they had this common thing between them: sadness. Grief is more proper perhaps, but how do I care. I was interested in knowing what part of the dying woman had become so interesting to everyone. What is so interesting about viral fever? Very generally, it is a fever spread by viral infection. Usually people do not care so much. Unless you are really fucked and you get one of the nasty variety that kills millions of people. Like the Great Yellow Fever. Not Ebola. There’s nothing Great about Ebola. Mostly it is very insignificant, the viral fever I mean. It is almost funny. Like according to this website called webhealthcentre.com: 

“Viral fever refers to a broad spectrum of conditions where viral infections are associated with elevations of body temperature. The term encompasses a wide variety of viral infections, some of which can be clearly identified by their symptoms and signs. These viral infections may show generalized symptoms, but may target specific organs. 

Headaches, body aches and a skin rash characterize most of these viral fevers. They may affect any age group, and are seen world-wide. They require only symptomatic treatment. Some are highly contagious. Most of them are not dangerous and self-limited, but some can progress rapidly leading to death.” 

Like you see while some are “highly contagious”, *most* of them are “self-limited”. So fragile that they self-destruct. A failed attempt at being sick. More like a failed attempt at dying. But even though my grandmother’s wasn’t any Great fever, it somehow worked. People were very interested, as you have heard. But what did this varied bunch find common in this fever or in this old lady? Like these weren’t people who ate the same flavor of ice cream. In fact, they would not eat ice cream if their particular flavor was not available, but still to maintain their uniqueness not choose someone else’s flavor. But yes, they were also the kind who would be very upset if you found your flavor and ate it, when they could not. They would be very upset if your kid won a judo championship and their kid did not, even though their kid never practiced judo in life. 

But I will try to tell you why it might have happened that all these people came together for this one purpose. I am no expert at telling people, but I will try: 

1.     1.  Generally, I would think they found something in her fever that had happened to each of them, or they had seen it happen. Well, that’s fever itself. But not everyone travelled so far every time a relative had fever. Like I said, a fever is just a fucking fever. No one cares. So what are we left with? Old age and death? Both are inevitable. Both are going to happen to all these people. So perhaps that connects. That someone somewhere else is as old as they once might be or would want to be and that she is dying like they would not want to but will have to. In that they share a common concern, a pain that they will face one day. Everyone feels the responsibility of seeing their future person erode, shrink and then vanish. The pull is that of a duty towards your own self. That we all share. 

2.     2.  Or you know, it is the feeling when you see an old person. Like I saw an old beggar the other day and gave him my food. He wasn’t the only beggar around at that place. But others were younger. Like there were kids carrying younger kids, somehow pulling them along. There were women with kids. Then there was this family that told you they had come from another state and had nowhere to go. But I gave my food only to that old person. There was something terribly cute in his oldness. He had no teeth. He ate the food like a fucking squirrel. It was very amusing. Like it made you feel warm inside although it was the winters. Old people have that effect like babies do. That’s why beggars carry babies or they carry walking sticks that make them look older than they are. Like fragile and handicapped. That can even make people cry. Or laugh, as in my case. So you feel like helping them. This gives you a very good feeling, that you can help weak people. That you can redeem someone else’s life for a moment while your own life sucks, makes you feel like a fucking god. So we care. 

3.     3. Or maybe it is death. Death is a terrible thing that happens to people. It is supposed to make you sad. Even if you are not sad, like I wasn’t, you are supposed to feel that way. By being present at a death you can be present at this very exciting place. You feel like you are witnessing something very novel. Like you know you don’t get to see it every day. If my grandmother had not died in front me, I must admit, I would not have been able to see death. Like no one else has ever died in front of me. I can’t openly brag about it, but I throw it in here and there in conversations that I have seen funeral pyre. I have seen a body burn slowly in the winters. You wait and wait and wait and you are annoyed that it is taking so long. You can feel that everyone else is as annoyed, but they won’t say. The body is pale. At times, the limbs fall out, and they are again pushed back to burn. At times, you are told that the body is not burning because some accessory or shit that the dead person used to wear wasn’t taken off. And then they are taken off. You see the dead person naked for the first time and you notice that many people are embarrassed. Actually everyone but the dead person. But it should not turn you on. You wonder if it is turning other people on. *Anyone here, turned on?* But you don’t ask. I don’t brag about the whole thing. I know I will get judged. But that I have seen a body burn and I have sat inside a dead body carrying van amused while everyone else was crying. It was my first time for god’s sake. So perhaps everyone visits for the thrill of the experience. 

4.    4. Continuing from the last point, it won’t be kind to diss this whole exercise as selfish. These people who go to witness death also take from the incident knowledge which they later benevolently pass on to others. Like to someone who has never seen death. How will that person cope with death when it comes, if he has never even heard of death in stories? So these people take it upon them to carry the knowledge of seeing naked dead bodies. And perhaps they also tell the inexperienced how not to get turned on at funerals. How to cry when everyone else is crying. How to not ask for Vaseline at commemoration ceremonies. (Especially that.) How to not look amused inside dead body carrying vans. With practice, I am sure, you can even master the art of sliding down the door more convincingly. They care. 

5.      5. And lastly, but importantly, this explains why the experienced people need to meet. Since most of my relatives are much older than I am, I believe they have seen more deaths than I have. So their meeting perhaps becomes necessary because apart from laughing and dressing up, they also share their common knowledge of having seen death with each other. So that when I dress up in kurta-pajama my aunt can look at my fuming mother and smile. Between them they know something that I do not know. It is common knowledge that one should not wear white kurta-pajamas to funerals. But perhaps people keep doing that. Who knows Bollywood might actually be fooling us. So they look at each other and there’s this fun that comes from knowing that others do not know. So perhaps all deaths are exercise in showing this common knowledge that they all share. 

** END ** 



*I am Debojit Dutta, a writer based in New Delhi, India, from where I run a literary webzine called Antiserious. My works have appeared in The Missing Slate, Himal Southasian, The Four Quarters Magazine, Motherland magazine, Kindle magazine and other places.* 

