From: Salil Chaturvedi <sal_chat@yahoo.com>
Date: 28 December 2015 at 10:15
Subject: Submission
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>

Bio: Salil Chaturvedi writes short fiction and poetry. He was the Asia region winner of the Commonwealth Short Story Competition 2008, and the winner of the Unisun/British Council Short Story Competition 2007. His stories have appeared in various anthologies and magazines, including Himal and Indian Quarterly. His haiku was shortlisted in The Raedleaf Poetry Award 2014. He currently lives on an island in Goa with his wife, dog and cat and lots of birds. 

SIRHANNA 

When the floods came Ramakant was sleeping, his cherished pillow half under his head, one arm around it as if protecting it from something. The pillow was easily Ramakant’s favourite object in the world. It was filled with the soft cotton of the Semal tree that grew on the edge of his one-bigha field. Every year he gathered more of the Semal cotton that was scattered all over his field by the March wind. He’d give the cotton to his wife and then lovingly watch the pillow grow centimeter by centimeter as his wife stuffed the fresh cotton expertly into the pillow. Ramakant found himself thinking of the pillow as a maturing child, but in truth, the pillow was more like a trusted companion, resting his head for hundreds of miles on his annual migration to the city. 

In early April, just after the harvest of the Rabi crop, Ramakant boarded the train from Dhenaji, in Bihar, to Delhi, where he ran a ‘relay’ paan shop in partnership with some of his village buddies. When one of the friends had to return home, usually summoned by a desperate wife on the other end of a phone line, another arrived from the village to look after the shop and its finances. The most important thing was to protect the turf and to ensure that the regular patrons didn’t switch loyalties. 

Customers were creatures of habit. Some would strike up a conversation as they waited for their change, or inquire about the families left behind in Bihar, yet, for most, stopping at the paan shop was part of their daily routine. A routine that could, if one was not careful, easily change to stopping at another paan shop. 

It was during a train journey to Delhi that Ramakant had first realised that pillows stored dreams, nightmares and other imaginings. There was no scientific basis for his belief—in fact, there was no scientific bone in Ramakant. He had lived most of his life in Dhenaji and had gone to the village school for two years before the teacher’s unbridled thrashings had driven out all urges for learning. But that’s not to say Ramakant had no education. He had picked up the Hindi alphabet and could read the newspaper that was pasted on the walls of the village panchayat. Every morning, he walked two kilometers to the panchayat office, brushing his teeth with a neem twig. At the panchayat office he would stand in front of the newspapers, munching the twig and mumbling or clucking his tongue in response to the news. If something was particularly off the mark, he would spit and exclaim, ‘Bakwaas!’ 

By and by, Ramakant had developed a deep distrust of journalists, for what he read in the newspapers often did not relate to what he saw around him. He felt that the sophisticated folk were extremely good at looking at things in isolation, but they failed to make the connections. And what were things without their connections? 

So, even though he had no scientific theory to back his claim, and was not sure how they did it, Ramakant was convinced that pillows collected dreams. That year —the year of this realization — whenever he used someone else’s pillow, he had been hounded by visions: he would dream about strange events, ghoulish monsters and sensuous parees, and sometimes about the other person’s wife, often naked, calling out to him with outstretched arms. He’d wake up with a start, troubled and guilt-ridden, light a bidi, and stare at the darkness and think about his wife in his attempt to exorcise the other women. In the process, he had seen his wife with the physical attributes of the wives of all his friends. He didn’t share the details of these dreams with any of his friends, of course, but he stopped sharing pillows. 

Once, hoping for some explanation, he had told one of his regular customers, a college student, about his experiences with the pillows. The student, after having encouraged him with the story, had eventually burst out laughing. ‘It’s their education,’ Ramakant thought to himself, ‘It comes in the way of belief.’ 

Now, as he was dreaming a pleasant dream, Ramakant was woken up by his wife’s vigorous shaking. The floods were upon them and the water was rising fast. Ramakant sat up with a start. It was about four in the morning and there was commotion all around. He rushed out of his hut and found himself wading in knee-deep water. He saw Nihor’s wife pushing a huge cooking pot ahead of her. In the pot sat her two-year old daughter. ‘Be careful what you cook today!’ Ramakant exclaimed and rushed back inside, still chuckling, to gather his family and belongings. The water was now waist-high. Following the example of Nihor’s wife, Ramakant sat his two sons aged four and two, and one-year old daughter, into buckets and pans while his wife quickly gathered her jewelry – a silver cummerbund and two sets of silver bracelets. She hoped that Seth Naval Kishore, the local pawnshop owner, had had time to save the villagers’ belongings. Ramakant looked around the house but he couldn’t think of what to save; everything was already under water. Then he remembered his pillow. He swam in to retrieve his pillow, emerging with it grasped in his teeth. He could see his wife and children ahead of him, at the mercy of the strong current. ‘Train linewa ke saathe saathe chal jahiyein!’ he shouted, the pillow still clutched firmly in his teeth, muffling his instructions. 

The railway track ran along the eastern edge of the village and, being on a raised embankment, it offered a thin strip of safety during floods. The previous year, the entire village had occupied the railway line, cooking, crapping and cursing on Indian Railway property for one whole week before the waters had receded. After the initial shock of the floods, people had found some release in black humour and had joked about which railway compartment they were in. Those who had managed to save a part of their belongings and slept on a mattress or a sheet were deemed to be in first-class compartments, while others who slept on the wooden sleepers of the railway tracks were obviously in the lowly general compartments. But they all shared a common toilet – the vast expanse of floodwaters on both sides of the embankment. On the third day, Air Force helicopters, in a peaceful demonstration of precision bombing, had dropped ‘relief bombs’ consisting mostly of food grains, candles, kerosene oil, polythene sheets and salt. These bombs were not meant to explode, but some did, spilling the emergency rations as children cheered and leapt into the water to retrieve what they could. Ramakant was amazed by the children’s ability to make a sport of an adversity. 

But that was last year. This morning’s flood was fierce and had taken everyone by surprise. As Ramakant swam after his wife and children, the weight of the wet pillow tired his jaw muscles. He could see that they would never be able to make it to the railway line. His wife’s saree had ballooned in the water and she was spinning like a top. The children went bobbing and bawling ahead of her in the temporary safety of their buckets. Ramakant tried swimming towards his family as best as he could but the current was too strong. His arms were tiring quickly and he was being swept away at a diagonal from his family. He was about to give up when he recognised the panchayat building looming ahead. He was surprised to find that he was swimming at the level of its roof. In a last ditch effort he paddled furiously towards the building but only managed to close the gap a little. As he glided past the building, two men standing on the corner of the roof lunged at him. They managed to grab his pillow and reeled him in like a fish with bait stuck in its mouth. It was a full five minutes before Ramakant could unlock his jaw and release the pillow. There were about twenty people on the roof. Seth Naval Kishore was one of them. ‘Baboo, Baboooo...’ Ramakant called out the name of his eldest son as soon as he got his jaws moving. To his amazement, he got an answering call from his wife. 

‘Tu kehar chi?’ he shouted towards the voice. 

‘Aha! Hum Pushpa ke chchat par chi. Bachcha hamra sath mein…sab theek chi. Tu kehar chi? (I’m on Pushpa’s roof. The kids are with me…everything’s all right. Where are you?), shouted his wife. 

‘Hum panchayat ke chchat par chi. Hamre saath Seth Nabal Kishore chi!’(On the panchayat roof. Listen, Seth Naval Kishore is with me!) 

‘Wo hamaar jevar bachcha lela ki?’ (Did he save my jewelry?), she responded almost as a reflex. 

‘Na, par hum apnaa jaan bachcha leli!’  (No. But I managed to save my life!), interjected a peeved Seth Naval Kishore. 

‘Aha, sirhanna bachcha leli ka?’ (Did you manage to save the pillow?), asked Ramakant’s devoted wife, ignoring Seth Naval Kishore. 

‘Arre, sirhanna hamaar jaan bachcha leli!’ (Well, the pillow saved my life instead!), shouted back Ramakant. 

‘Badaa khaas sirhanna chi,’ (It’s a special pillow), called out Ramakant’s wife. 

‘Hau!’  agreed Ramakant. 

As dawn broke, people were ferried across roofs on makeshift boats to unite them with their families. The water level was still high and there was no sign of the railway track. The panchayat’s roof, being the largest and sturdiest, accommodated the most number of families. A quick assessment of damage was undertaken. Someone reported seeing two boys on a buffalo that had gone sweeping by, but they seemed to be from another village. At final count, it seemed that one-third of the population was missing. 

Everyone agreed that this had been the worst flood in living memory. Ramakant was quite certain that the answer lay in the newspaper reports, if only one could join the dots. Since the beginning of the monsoon he had been reading that most of the reservoirs in the country had been close to full within the first month of the rains. He was quite sure that the dams had released water without informing anyone. Everyone laughed at this preposterous thought and told Ramakant to keep his theories to himself. 

Just then, a surge of water swept over the roof. Miraculously, everyone managed to cling on to something or someone. Those that were taken by surprise were saved by the raised parapet of the roof. The only person missing was Ramakant who had been standing on the ledge to address everyone. 

Right below where he’d been standing lay his pillow, drenched with his dreams. 

END 