From: rajendra <rajendrashepherd@hotmail.com>
Date: 20 January 2016 at 04:42
Subject: Submission
To: "outofprintmagazine@gmail.com" <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>

Bio: Rajendra Shepherd is a writer, journalist and artist who works at the University of the West Indies, St Augustine.  His flash fiction *La haine de la diablesse* was published in Akashic Books’ Duppy Thursday series, and his novel-in-progress shortlisted by Myriad Editions.  He is a nominee for the Aeon Award 2015.  His non-fiction book *Tilt – the gaze that changes everything: 90 ways to rule your world *is a transformative work on language of the self and is available on Amazon.com for kindle and in all major bookstores in Trinidad and Tobago. 


*No one quite knows when goodness will befall them: it may come in the form of riches, or in the form of…well…however it may arrive, know that Thosalus (pronounced, Thoss-a-luss) has a good explanation for it.  * 

*Of Thosalus born* 

When Jason arrived it was in a box.  Plain brown, the flaps on top pulled and taped closed like two flat lips, silenced.  Bitty conversation trilled outside.  Furtive.  Pleas for quiet.  An admonition from a heavy voice, then silence.  Faces, greasy at the doorway lit by the dipping sun.  The box was settled at the centre of the kitchen table under which rested pots of various towers, plates and lids, and the saucers: the saucers only sanctioned from behind their curtained home for Christmas: the birth of Christ the Redeemer, alone, that was deserving of saucers – and now the arrival of Jason, who thrummed the inner sanctum of his box at the sound of a saucer swept clattering from its very own box home. 

Thosalus looked up, eyes like stagnant yolks, as his father peeled the flaps back to lift Jason out accompanied by a puff of ochre glitter that dissipated into thin air.  Gasps from the doorway.  Mother bustling, chattering too.  Jason’s dazzling crimson wings beating the air, his black face contorted in a scowl.  A coffee-bean nose and plump cheeks – baby-faced.  Teeth though.  And a patch or two of dark mossy hair. Thosalus’s father, a face-full of dusty feathered air, his hands wrapped with eggshell delicacy around a bare chest, fingers meeting.  “Geeeeeedd,” Thosalus articulated, but it wasn’t clear if because of the smell of mud and wet wood drifting in from at the side of the house, or on account of Jason’s crumpled features and ever-so-slight vamp of spent fireworks. 

“There’ll be none of that,” the man boomed, looming over Jason to place him delicately on the linoleum, next to the saucer now piled with fatty slices of guava, sucré fig and a single bloated grape.  Mother moved consolingly to Thosalus’s side.  Jason’s wings had come to a stop.  And now at the sight of the fruit he sat on his bare bottom, transfixed by their lurid colours.  Thosalus tried for a look of contrition, edging behind two stout calves that at the knees disappeared into a polyester skirt.  The villagers at the doorway looked up momentarily, then back at the grubby angel, Thosalus hoped not *noticing* his scolding. 

*** 

That ‘summer’ La Ventille would learn much more of Thosalus’s ways, and ironically one misunderstood boy would succeed where many politicians had failed; to lift the reputation of an out-of-luck settlement known mostly for gang violence, child mothers and its horrid reputation for men of bad mind. 

*** 

To be honest, in the early days it was touch-and-go:  Thosalus gave particular trouble at night when it came to sharing his bed, on account of “Jason’s stink”.  His Mother sensing her boy’s ire took to giving Thosalus breakfast from a saucer too.  She chanced upon this balm when Jason, now eating at the kitchen table, slid with both hands his tiny plate of bitten fruit before Thosalus.  There was a moment where like a moko jumbie on one foot, things teetered in delicate balance: Father peering over the rim of his coffee cup mid-sip, Thosalus frighteningly close to a steups.  But he knew from experience the dangers of skinning teeth, and so he opted for something resembling a smile.  Jason laughed.  Thosalus laughed.  Father sipped his coffee. 

Mother would spend her days at home with Jason, at first tending to his electrocuted wing, which she presumed had been struck by lightening.  Later when the burn stink went away she would say Jason couldn’t be left alone - “he’s so small”.   At times Thosalus would creep home from school and would peer through a split in their wooden front door to see the woman cooing, Jason fluttering, his mother clapping joyously and singing: “All things bright and beautiful…” presuming angels liked only hymns. 

Jason, although he had never set foot in school was big news in the playground; and once the media had tracked down the story – it took a few months for anyone in the newsroom to believe the rumours and one thing La Ventille residents were good at was keeping a story hush hush.  Thosalus used various referents for Jason when called to, beginning with “him” and “it”, and after the TV6 interview and buoyed by local pride, went with “my brother” and revealed he was happy Jason no longer slept butt-naked (just because boys get embarrassed by these things eventually, cherub or not). 

The small crowds who afterwards began to visit Thosalus’s home quickly became a nuisance, on account that he didn’t like crowds.  It vexed him to be the one to suggest that they “could make it official”: but he hated more when others were not privy to his brilliance.  The procession would trail past and see Jason watch TV, flit wondrously about the room or play with Mother.  No one was allowed to come nearer than the designated area marked by a picket fence, 48-carefully-measured-inches from the side of the house.  And no talking, whatsoever. 

Neighbours were hired to enforce these rules; occasionally more fastidiously than necessary.  Father, now settled with Mother not working, made up for this with the new levy of TT$1 per pass.  It wasn’t exactly a charity collection, but Father had carefully worded a statement that said ‘Monies will be used to support Jason and given, whenever possible, to the needy.’  Father ranked himself quite high on the needy list, on account of his having to walk to work, and was particularly pleased with his legalese ‘whenever possible’. 

Heavy rains came and went; cane ash like black moths settling on everything; Thosalus cautiously accessing the various packets and tightly knotted parlor bags on top of Mother’s new fridge.  There seemed less to grouch about.  Jason, still something of a human corbeau to look at, was by now thinking with considerable erudition, without need for school; something else that vexed our unlikely hero.  Jason never visited a mobile library; watched very little TV and Father had gallantly refused to allow the internet.  Jason uninvolved in these domestic matters meant Thosalus was left to read books, many of which he did not own.  As a consequence Jason was much loved as the family’s golden goose, easy to please, fruit-eating, oracle.  Thosalus loved him, sort of, but couldn’t help feel Jason was ‘pretend happy’.  Thosalus was quite pleased when he formed this idea one night, the pair in bed draped in moonlight that flooded through the open window. 

“It doesn’t seem honest to *not* argue,” said Thosalus staring up at the galvanise ceiling.  For him arguing was something of a hobby.  What was wrong with proving you were right?  Surely everyone wanted to be right?  La Ventille had developed a broad back by defending its rightness.  Jason, who lay on his belly, head turned to the moon, murmured his agreement.  For much of the past hour Thosalus hadn’t seen his brother’s eyes wandering. The truth was, Jason’s happiness was forged in human happiness, but over time it had been hard to make Mother and Father see this.  What he really ached for…was *less*.  Less clutter, less stuff. 

It was a predicament he had foreseen, dear listener.  The mind of an angel can never be that of man.  Neither should man worry to be an angel because how these two shall grow is unique to each.  Jason wanted to cite the incantation that less is more: you cannot lose what you do not have, and to want nothing is to have everything you want.  But there is a deathly leap to be made to cross this chasm, and while an angel can fly, Mother and Father could not.  Thosalus, however, had grown nimble-witted by having a brother of such vast knowing. 

So that night Thosalus just couldn’t help himself.  “Jason…?” he ventured after some considerable silence, “…do you ever wonder about your *real* home?”  For quite a while the moon sat glassy in the sky, eerily quiet.  It wasn’t until it had long passed the edge of the window frame that the conversation picked back up again.  In another room Father snored an unknowing, contented snore; Mother drew herself closer.  They spoke for some while longer, but by the time Thosalus became aware again the morning sun was pinching his eyelids; and Jason was flapping and clattering over breakfast in the kitchen. 

The night before had lodged itself in his ideas and they wouldn’t shift. This was one deliberation that he would have happily let lapse, because by now he was deeply fond of Jason: crimson wings broad like a hefty swan’s; cherubic grin and molasses-colored skin; his funny afro that never managed much beyond patchy tufts like savannah grass in dry season.  And Mother seemed so chirpy. 

Mother and Father oblivious to the change in Jason’s demeanor went on as always.  If not for Thosalus’s confidence in his own ability who knows what would have become: but somehow things always manage to turn out as they should. 

That night flat in bed, Thosalus pondered his latest revelation - that they *could* take Jason back to where he was found!  “Wouldn’t you be able to reach home from there?”  He’d grown more comfortable with this new meaning for ‘home’ having mulled it over for quite some time.  Jason pushed himself up on his little black knees, the sponge mattress sinking a little.  “Yes,” is all he said, because he always knew. 

So, one evening in October when Father returned from work, Thosalus was already changed from his big-school uniform into home clothes.  This was not a common occurrence, Thosalus preferring to let his uniform get dirty since he would have to wear it the next day anyhow.  The boy’s logic was impeccable and Father had long stopped arguing about it too.  Peace just seemed so much easier.  “Boys.  Mother,” Father said, hefting his way to the old centre table, heavy labour on his frown.  The pots and pans no longer towered beneath, and the saucers had long since been decommissioned falling foul of wear and tear.  But the family home was still lively. Jason’s beating wings occasionally expanded, casting a shadow in the room that was punctuated by his clouds of iridescence; but living here he had grown accustomed to flitting in small spaces. 

Father listened intently.  Thosalus reasoned and Jason explained.  Mother let a tear roll to her chin, and when she could hold back the reality of her impending loss no longer, Father cried too.  Soon the air was salty with emotion, but Father said no good-life should leave in sorrow and ventured to his bedroom cupboard to retrieve a dusty bottle of some old rum.  He was the only one who drank, and as the cubes of ice chinked he gave a half smile, too unhappy to cry and too empty to smile fully. Promises were made, many by Thosalus.  Choked words.  Sobbing stories. Hysterical laughs and prayer. 

In the quiet of that night they made their way down a packed mud track to Father’s car: for he had an old Cortina now, and in it they squeezed. Thosalus in the back, Jason in a box marked: “Fragile – this way up,” on account of not wanting the neighbours to know.  Now some way on the edge of La Ventille the moon streaked a silver line around the silhouette of a most unusual family.  They left the car at the edge of a savannah high above Town, a few trees to its credit.  Thosalus rested the “Fragile” box down among some weedy shrubs, a bullfrog groaning into the night, a scattering of fireflies dancing in the trees.  Feeling the stillness Jason popped his head from his carriage, grinning as he was prone to, and in the distance below traffic thrummed along a highway, which Mother presumed was busier than usual for this time of year.  The four listened to it together, as a family for the very last time, happily.  And Jason said goodbye to which Thosalus said, with a wink that he would see him around – soon.  Thosalus was certain. 

THE END 

*Epilogue* 

Grayson gripped the edge of the cloud and peered off *Giant Nimbus IV* with mixed emotions.  The sudden up-draught swept back his platinum mane, causing his tiny porcelain cheeks to flush and his chestnut-coloured wings flex with an opalescent plume of burnt umber.  The whisper of Jason’s return filled him with utter relief - one can only approximate in human dimensions the cosmic “bouff” that comes with a cherub letting another accidently slide off a Nimbus while “joshing”.  No leniency for the unseasonably shocking lightning.  The Seraphim Assembly had made certain to say then that “the descending” was far from Grayson’s punishment but rather a learning to be bestowed upon him on Jason’s return. 

Grayson wasn’t completely sure of all this.  He edged his head back into the billowy quiet of the lilac cloudscape, marvelling at the sun-flecked towering structure of fluffy outcrops; pools of icy water, and cushioned pockets that extended up high into the dazzling cerulean sky.  But there was this knotty issue of “delivering the abundance,” the Assembly’s imperious head of missions had called it.  She had raised a devastating eyebrow at Grayson’s whining protestations of the unseemly weather surely being an act of God and maybe, even, this had always been *their* plan. Now, Grayson was quite certain he wouldn’t take well to tutelage, especially from his younger brother.  And so while he waited, he toyed playfully with the idea that he still had a choice about being earth-sent despite the Assembly’s terse wording on the matter: that, and the disparaging eyebrow. 

*** 