From: Janet Swinney <janet.swinney@zen.co.uk>
Date: 17 March 2016 at 17:02
Subject: RE: Sumission only - 'The Menace at the Gate' - 'Drishti'
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>


*Drishti* 

Satish sits in his high chair with his spindly legs wound round one another in garudasana[1] <#m_-7906438998179395708__ftn1>. He is wearing the uniform the company provided him with eighteen months ago: scarlet shorts with yellow stripes down the sides, and a blouson jacket in the same colours that is far too big for him. He also has a pair of goggles, picked up from a market stall, and a large canvas hat. The jacket has the word ‘drishti’[2] <#m_-7906438998179395708__ftn2> inscribed on the back, and when he’d first put it on he’d been pretty damn proud of it. At least someone else in the family besides his mother had managed to get a job. Now, the jacket is beginning to show signs of being too long in the sun, and alongside the yellow stripes that run down the sleeves there is another one, a sort of bleached tapioca colour. 

From his perch, he scans the bay. It’s still too early in the day for much to be going on. The European women might be up, but they’ll be at their yoga classes, or taking long, complicated breakfasts – that might feature cigarettes – in the beachfront cafés. As for the Indians, well God knows what they’re doing: knocking up a day’s supply of parathas probably. They never appear until nearly midday. The tide is just on the turn, still licking voraciously at the foreshore; undercutting the beach, and leaving great creaming scallops of frothing lace behind it as it slides back into the ocean. The sky is clear and the sun is already warming up, but the breeze is a little stiffer than you would normally expect for the time of year, making the flags on the marker posts flap briskly. Out in the blue bay, the surface of the water is covered with raised white eyebrows. 

Two white men come down to the water, one young, one not-so-young: father and son possibly. They compete with each other, swimming in towards the shore through the breaking waves. The older man is holding his own until a larger wave smacks him on the back and drags the pants off him. And that puts an end to that. Satish clicks his tongue. This is an error of judgement nearly all bathers make: they mistake the beauty of the sea for beneficent good nature. Still, this is what justifies his being here. 

He watches another man in checked pants playing Frisbee by himself. Is that really possible? He looks around for a dog who might be serving as the man’s sparring partner. None to be seen. The man flicks his wrist and throws the plastic dish high into the air so that it circumscribes a parabolic arc, turning back upon itself some distance away. The man then jogs towards it at a steady and none-too-athletic pace and catches it as it nears the ground. Hai, hai! How sad. No playmates. 

Having inspected his surroundings, Satish now turns his attention to his fingernails and, in particular, the one on the thumb of his left hand which denotes his membership of an obscure Vaishnavite sect. He has been cultivating this carefully. It now extends about an inch beyond the end of the digit, and is varnished a bright red. He likes the kudos the thumbnail brings him, marking him out as an insider in some clandestine group. He enjoys the look of wariness that crosses local people’s faces when they spot it. He likes the way Europeans recoil and then grow curious. 

It was Dhirendra who’d got him involved in the whole business. Dhirendra is also a ‘drishti’, some years his senior and full of savvy. He says little about himself, but he rides a Kawasaki bike that his meagre wage doesn’t justify; wears a black t-shirt with the sleeves ripped out, and has a snake tattoo that starts by his ear, and curls down over his bicep. 

Dhirendra is the kind of guy who mooches about the town of an evening, usually outside the loudest bars and wine shops. He’s on good terms with a remarkably large number of people it is important to know – bar owners, bouncers, security guards at posh residences and so on. After the power goes off at eight, he puts the bike into a low gear and trundles round the dark streets with the headlamp off, seeing what unusual goings-on he can uncover – fellows entering houses that are not their own; home-made hooch being transported in three wheelers; girls disposing of unwanted babies in garbage bins: that sort of thing. These days, Satish is often a passenger on the pillion, as Dhirendra roams the drinking dens and eateries and follows solitary women scuttling to get home after work. 

Their meetings with their guru take place a couple of times a week. A handful of them cram into the small room he rents on the upper floor of a down-at-heel building. The form is this: the guru waits until they have all paid their respects, and then recites some scriptural homily, which he proceeds to expound upon, generally emphasising its supernatural properties. In no time at all, they are immersed in consideration of astral projection, the manipulation of auras, the casting of spells and all manner of other ‘siddhis’[3] <#m_-7906438998179395708__ftn3>. Satish is already beginning to discover the lure of being able to menace someone just because you can, and is interested in learning more. 

The guru is an excellent story-teller and, often, as he brews up on a burner some potent concoction for them all to drink, he also brews up tales of the remarkable things he has witnessed in the far-off pilgrimage places of the land. They ponder these at length, hoping to learn from them what they might apply in their own lives to right wrongs and reverse ill-fortune. Then, as they lie back on their divans, he summons favoured ones, presses a kumkum-covered thumb to their foreheads, and issues them with charms and mantras to assist them in their endeavours. Satish has already received a beginners’ mantra from which he hopes to graduate if he recites it often enough. ‘Submit to me, mere bachche[4] <#m_-7906438998179395708__ftn4>,’ the guru says,’ his eyes glittering alluringly, ‘then whatever you desire, all is coming.’ Satish experiences a clenching feeling in his lower entrails. 

Close inspection of the thumbnail reveals that the cuticle has started to grow back over the half moon and that he’s amassed a considerable amount of grime under it as a result of the oil change he helped Dhirendra perform on Sunday morning. Obviously some routine maintenance is required. Dhirendra has informed him that the nail will enable him to give female personages a good time. He has difficulty envisaging how, but he is loathe to give up on the possibility before he’s had a chance to try it out. One thing, though: the nail is certainly a bloody big nuisance when it comes to using his cell phone. 

In fact, he has two cell phones: one brick-sized one in a plastic bag that he is supposed to use for making calls to the emergency post in the main resort - this he keeps strung up on the metal frame of the canopy that shelters him from the sun - and his own, more slim-line affair, which he keeps in the pocket of his jacket. He takes out his own phone, and opens up *Grand Theft Auto, Punjab*, which he downloaded at the week-end, but hasn’t had a chance to try. He looks at the opening screen shot – conveniently, the canopy means that he isn’t troubled by reflections – and is just gearing up to start, when he notices the distinctive figure of Miss Mango Slice making her way along the shoreline. 

Miss Mango Slice is the love of his life though she doesn’t know it. He calls her that because she always wears a yellow blouse and a concoction of yellow and orange shawls and skirts that he can’t quite fathom. And today, as usual, she has a red leather hat with a wide brim jammed firmly on her head. She makes her way towards him in a leisurely but purposeful manner, with her big basket braced on one hip, and her sweeping brush trailing from her other hand. He can’t take his eyes off her. He admires the way she paces herself. She works long hours, mostly in the hot sun, criss-crossing the beach systematically until the job is done. He struggles to think of what he might say to her once she gets close to him. He settles for a small joke: 

‘Found any gold today, Miss Mango Slice?’ 

Miss Mango Slice looks up at him solemnly from beneath her hat. She waves her brush back in the direction from which she’s come and tells him that the Russians were fooling about late last night and had left beer bottles stuck in the sand just below the high water mark. Satish clicks his tongue to show he shares her outrage. ‘Idiots,’ he says. ‘Some kid could’ve got hurt.’ 

Miss Mango Slice is way below him socially. Poor though his family is, his mother would be horrified if she knew that he entertained thoughts of a relationship with a refuse collector. Miss Mango Slice is older than him too. That’s easy to tell. He doesn’t even know if she’s married, as she wears none of the usual markers. However, as he looks down into her laconic brown eyes, and notes the jittery earring that plays against her neck in the breeze, like a bunch of keys inviting entry, he knows he just doesn’t care. 

Miss Mango Slice puts down the tools of her trade. She places a hand to her forehead and points out to sea. She asks him some question. Satish doesn’t follow what she’s saying at first, nor does he follow her gaze. Instead, he studies the elegant extension of her arm, the subtle angle of her bent wrist and the languid unfurling of her forefinger. He melts with desire. At last, he gathers his thoughts sufficiently to explain that, even with the help of the binoculars, he can’t see whose boat is standing to beyond the horizon. Miss Mango Slice smiles sadly. ‘Ah,’ she sighs. She gathers up her things, and drifts off again across the sand, showing him an excellent pair of pink heels and long, narrow, well-formed calves. Now it is his turn to sigh. Aam sutra![5] <#m_-7906438998179395708__ftn5> How he thirsts for her, and how hopeless that craving is. What can he ever do or say to displace in her affections the fellow who labours on the other side of the horizon? 

*Grand Theft Auto, Punjab* is really disappointing. He has been looking forward to something that is authentically Indian, with over-laden trucks parmping their horns, meandering cows, and tractors chundering towards you on the wrong side of the carriageway. Yes, OK, the designers have factored in a few Indian vehicles – a Mahindra Scorpio, a Tata Jeep – but otherwise, the streetscape is undeniably urban American. Even the street signs are wrong.  He fiddles with it for a little while, doing his best to build up a bit of speed on the keys with his nuisance nail and his other thumb, then gives up in disgust. 

Things are livening up a bit. A pallid girl comes and unfurls a towel in the shadow of a fishing boat and takes out a book. Satish examines the long slope of her breasts before they disappear into two scallops of bright pink bikini. The girl has a dog with her. It digs itself a trench alongside her, and settles down with its tongue hanging out. It looks as though it needs a book to read too. Then groups of Indian businessmen, escaping from their hotels, and one or two families escaping from hum-drum domestic life start to arrive. The sea turns jade green in colour as the sun climbs higher in the sky. 

Six businessmen unpack a cooler box full of Kingfisher. They disport the glossy bellies that overhang their shorts with a certain amount of pride, as evidence of the conscientious effort they have already applied to the consumption of alcohol and to the good life in general. Each of them has a compensatory stoop to offset the belly. Conversing loudly, like dowagers at a cocktail party, they dangle bottles of beer from limp wrists, as though it’s too much trouble to drink it, and finger cigarettes it’s too much effort to smoke. Perhaps they’re discussing sales figures, or maybe the women they had the night before. Satish watches them with distaste. They’re like a shoal of puffer fish with nowhere to go. He despises their profligacy, but covets the wealth that makes it possible. The men begin a disorderly game of kabbadi and are soon out of breath. More alcohol is taken. 

Satish digs under his thumbnail with a tooth pick for a bit, and then gets back to his phone. He opens up *Extreme Riptide*, a body-boarding game. This looks more promising. He plugs in his earphones, and ties a scarf round his head to protect his face from the reflected midday sun. Beneath his hat, and above the scarf, only his shades are visible. *Extreme Riptide* is an altogether more interesting proposition. As Rory Riptide, you can get out on the waves, and learn to pull all kinds of tricks. The better you get, the higher you score. When you move up a level, you are rewarded with a new board. The visuals are pretty good, and the soundtrack has a pumping bass under a compelling guitar riff. You get a real sense of being on a beach on Australia’s Gold Coast. He grasps the principles quickly, and sets to with enthusiasm. As before, though, the jutting thumbnail cramps his style. Eventually, after due persistence, he manages a score of five hundred and twenty eight and feels pleased with himself. 

Suddenly, it occurs to him that he’s thirsty. He glances at his waterproof watch. His shift should be coming to an end soon, but there’s no sign of Dhirendra who should be replacing him. He tries him on his cell phone. There’s no answer. He leaves a message for him: ‘Hey, bhai, where are you? Get your cool ass right down here. I’ve got something to show you.’ He knows Dhirendra isn’t easily impressed, but he gives it a try anyway. 

A group of European women drop their sarongs on the beach and launch into the water. They’re followed by two young men.  Most amuse themselves diving through the waves, but soon three of them are well out beyond the surf line, two treading water, and the third, a woman, doing a very commendable crawl.  A party of Indian lads arrive, on high octane for the day. One of them is in a wheelchair. His mate is pushing him. The wheelchair doesn’t look anything very modern, maybe a cast off from a hospital department. Anyway, even though the crippled guy wears red leather gloves and snazzy trainers at the ends of his shrivelled legs, it’s clear he isn’t going anywhere fast. His mate heaves and shoves, but he can manage to move his cargo no more than a few centimetres at a time. The rest of the party runs shrieking into the water. The mate can contain his enthusiasm for the sea no longer. He leaves his wheelchair-bound friend in the rough, his chair tilted forward in a nosedive towards the sand. The guy in the chair adjusts his spectacles philosophically with a leather-gloved hand. He has very dark skin. Perhaps he’s been left out in the sun more than once too often. ‘You and me both, bhai,’ Satish thinks bitterly. 

Things are getting too complicated in the water. The Indians are thrashing about in the zones reserved for the whites. Of course, they haven’t troubled themselves to find out what the flags signify. The browns are supposed to go between the red flags right in front of him, whereas the whites can go in the areas on either side, marked out by red and yellow flags. Beyond that are areas where you go at your own peril, as nobody is guarding them. On the drishti training course, it had been explained that Europeans generally know how to swim and have a better idea of how to handle themselves in the water, whereas Indians, on the whole, are hopeless. This was why there were separate zones. Satish wonders about his own situation as a dark-skinned man. What should he do if someone were to get into trouble in the white-skin area? Is he just supposed to stand at the edge and shout? He doesn’t feel the course fully addressed this matter. Anyway, things are getting chaotic and he needs to do something about it. 

Reluctantly, he puts his phone aside and climbs down from his chair. He stalks to and fro along the beach, blowing his whistle, and waving his arms at the errant Indians. If they notice him at all, they look back at him uncomprehendingly. He keeps at it for several minutes, effecting some minor change, and then gives up. The tide is ebbing fast, so while he’s down, he takes the opportunity to move the flags further down the foreshore, and wheels his chair forward. He reorganises the surfboard and his float and climbs back up again. 

Dhirendra really ought to be here by now. He tries phoning him again. Stll no answer. He elaborates the message he has already left, trying to sound upbeat rather than anxious, which would be really uncool. 

At last, Rory Riptide performs a competent series of basic manoeuvres, and Satish accumulates a score that allows him to move up to intermediate level. Yey! He still needs to get his left hand technique sorted out though. Things are still far too slow using the thumbnail, and his rate of inaccuracy is far too high. He tries a few rounds using his forefinger, and another few using his pinkie, but no go: Rory crashes repeatedly into the water. Advanced aerial manoeuvres are going to be an impossibility if he can’t gain any greater mastery than this. He adjusts his sun glasses, furrows his brow and applies himself with fevered concentration. 

Suddenly, a stillness descends, as though something has stopped. The sun is at its zenith. The white woman has finished churning to and fro across the bay; the reader and her dog have gone for lunch in a beachfront cafe to discuss plot devices; the young men have trundled their friend away to see if they can find somewhere that serves idli and sambhar, and a fishing boat has whisked the businessmen away to a drinking paradise in another bay. Miss Mango Slice is nowhere to be seen. The whole place is in suspended animation. 

Satish stops playing. He is desperately uncomfortable. His mouth is dry and his belly is rattling. He is gasping for a drink of water, but there is no-one he can ask, and he can’t leave his post. If anything were to go wrong while he were away, he would be in deep trouble. He tries Dhirendra’s number again. This time there’s a mumbling voice. 

‘Where the hell are you, bhai? I’m frying to a potato chip here.’ More mumbling. This time he makes out the words, ‘Fuel tank leaking.’ 

‘Are you stoned? Or more?’ There’s a belch followed by a scream of laughter at the other end. Shit! Satish ends the call. 

He’s stuck now, torn between loyalty to his friend and seeing to his own pressing needs. If he phones HQ for relief, it could make trouble for Dhirendra. It wouldn’t be the first time he hadn’t turned up for work. In any case, the roster is pretty tight: it would take them an age to find someone to replace him and then to get them here. He decides to sit out the first part of the afternoon in the hope that Dhirendra might get his head together, realise the spot he’s placed his friend in and eventually turn up. It’s a fond hope, he knows, but he’s short on ideas. He’s furious about being exploited, but he has more than a sneaking admiration for Dhirendra’s libertarian attitude. 

The sky whitens with the heat. Two hawks drift out from the palm trees that line the beach, and soar out over the sea, first one taking the lead and then the other. Four dogs prance down to the water’s edge. After a dancing a brief quadrille, two of them suddenly plonk themselves down in the waves to cool their balls. Satish sits in his spindly chair like a scorpion roasting on a stick. There’s only one thing he can do to take his mind off the situation: he sets about persuading Rory to learn some new tricks. 

It’s about a quarter past two – he’s just completed a particularly satisfying game where he’s managed to get Rory to carve for ages along the barrel of a wave and emerge unscathed – when he notices some activity along the foreshore. It’s Eddie Carvalho untangling the kite-boarding kit his nephew brought back from Dubai last year. There are few bathers around now, but Eddie’s noticed the lively breeze, and come down to the beach to see what business he can drum up. He’s caught the interest of one white man, a tall chap with the minimum of hair and the maximum in shorts, who’s sniffing around waiting for the kit to be assembled. Eddie gets the stuff organised, and appears to offer some instruction. Satish gathers from the shrug of the white guy’s shoulders and the flap of his hands that he’s brushing this aside. Maybe he has some experience already, or maybe he thinks there’s nothing an Indian can tell him he doesn’t already know. He flounders about a bit in the shallows, and then – whup! – there he is, up on the board and off. 

Satish watches him stutter out across the bay. He starts cautiously at first with a straight run out and a straight run back. There’s a stiffness in his body that those who are fluent in water sports no longer have. His bent-leg stance suggests someone who is trying to avoid sitting on a spike. He carries on with the straight runs until he gets the feel of it. Then he starts on arcs, modest ones initially, tacking round one side of the bay and then back. Then he tries the other side. Same again. Little by little, he increases the size of the arcs. Once or twice, he loses control of the kite and it collapses into the sea. When this happens, he stays in the water for a while, taking patient, recuperative strokes. Then he manages to launch the kite again and, as it creeps into the sky, he is hauled from the waves to resume his quasi-seated position. The guy is maybe not as proficient as he would like to think, but he’s dedicated. As there’s no sign of imminent danger, Satish gets back to trying to get Rory to back flip out of the lip of the wave. It’s very frustrating: the nail makes him so much clumsier and so much slower than he needs to be. Rory topples off his board once again. 

The next time he looks up, the white guy is performing a lurching series of figure eights. The bulging kite twists and turns above him, sometimes turning red, sometimes blue, against the ocean. A handful of stragglers have come down to the water’s edge to watch him. A European with a vast zoom lens on his camera is trying to follow the action. Satish wouldn’t mind being able to perform such feats himself. There’s no point in even thinking about it, though. Where would he get the money from? Unless...? ‘Submit to me, mere bachche, then whatever you desire, all is coming.’ Satish wavers momentarily, then gets back to his game. 

By late afternoon, the guy is still at it. The sky is now the colour of a dirty dish towel, the sun hanging like a molten eye at its centre. The face of every breaking wave is chromium plated, and the surface of the sea an incandescent sheet of beaten metal. The man and his kite are visible only in silhouette. The stragglers have gone. The breeze has strengthened, fixing the flags on the poles at an unwavering horizontal, and sending chiffon scarves of sand snaking across the beach. Only Satish remains, wilting in his canvas tabernacle, and Eddie, pacing frantically to and fro along the shoreline. The white guy has been out there for far longer than he has paid for, with the most valuable asset Eddie possesses. 

It is evident to Satish now that he is stuck here for the double shift. The sides of his throat cling together through lack of water, and he feels sick with hunger. The backs of his eyes ache. Once he gets out of here, he will have to reassess his allegiances. He looks out to sea briefly. The guy on the kiteboard is careening out towards the horizon at a tremendous lick. His figure is so small that Eddie waving to him from the beach must be totally invisible to him. What the hell is he playing at? Is it some kind of off-shore smuggling ruse? Is he expecting a delivery of gold nuggets to his generously proportioned shorts? 

Satish considers what he would do if the guy got into trouble now. While further up the coast at the larger resorts, the lifeguards have a Sea-Doo at their service, he has only a battered surfboard with a bent fin and a load of running repairs along the edge. Even if he were to paddle like a fan set on turbo, there’s no way he could make it that far out. Let him carry on to Djibouti if that’s what he wants, then he’ll have only himself to answer to. 

But, at the last possible instant, before disappearing over the horizon, the kiteboarder changes course. Slowly he grows in size. Mercifully, despite the offshore winds, he manages to execute a change of direction, and starts heading inshore. Satish breathes a sigh of relief. The guy will be back on the beach in a matter of minutes. He attacks intermediate level again, plugging his headphones deep into his ears so that he gets the full benefit of the soundtrack. He is determined to get to advanced level, where you have to avoid obstacles, like rocks and buoys, before his double shift is over. At least then he’ll be able to say he’s done something worthwhile with his day. And he can shove that right up Dhirendra’s groovy ass. 

But the kiteboarder has his own agenda. He decides to take a complicated route back to the shore. Instead of setting his sights on Eddie, he veers towards the slew of rocks that are the outliers of the headland on the northern side of the bay.  Eddie dances an apoplectic but silent dance on the edge of the beach. Not even the locals go near this shoal of rocks because of the treacherous way the currents challenge one another, and the surf takes issue with itself. While Satish frenetically dabbles his keyboard, trying to get Rory to perfect an air roll spin, the kiteboarder weaves erratically in and out of the rocks. Sometimes only his kite is visible as the rocks grow larger; sometimes he is visible too in the feisty gaps in between. There are strange hesitations in his line of progress, odd moments when the kite hangs in the air and nothing seems to happen; others where he bounces forward in what appears to be a surfeit of enthusiasm. Satish’s thumbs jiggle frantically up and down above the keypad. Every now and then, he bangs his feet on the top rung of his chair to help him pull off a trick. Eddie has his fists to his mouth and is holding his breath. 

The kiteboarder is now tearing towards the headland proper. It’s not clear that he can avoid the wall of rock. Suddenly, the billowing kite jerks and pivots several times on its lines, then both it and its human freight are lost to the gaze of any observer. But only Eddie is watching, and he drops to his knees in despair. Satish battles on furiously, tapping and clicking, the driving guitar riff swelling repetitively inside his ears. Success is within his grasp. Then, all at once, the kite appears above the headland, its shape like a curl of potato peel or a clipping from a fingernail. It cruises in stately fashion behind the stand of palm trees that crown the headland and then, freed from its human cargo, and as though bidding goodnight, disappears finally from view. Eddie lets out a yelp. Satish fouls up with the thumbnail, and it skids right off the keypad. Rory executes an ungainly pirouette and takes yet another tumble. Satish swears and looks up. He yanks the headphones off and observes the empty ocean. Like someone returning from a lengthy journey, it takes a moment for him to connect. Shit!  Now he really is in trouble. Man lost at sea while on his watch. He looks fixedly at the nail and then at his phone. No job, no income, no woman. What are his options? ‘Submit to me, mere bachche, then whatever you desire, all is coming.’ Somewhere behind him, up beyond the fringe of palm trees, he hears the faint but familiar cackle of a motorbike. He stands on the top step of his chair and, mustering all the strength he can, flings his cell phone far out into the surf. 

*From:* The Editors [mailto:outofprintmagazine@gmail.com] *Sent:* 11 March 2016 03:39 *To:* Janet Swinney *Subject:* Re: Sumission only - 'The Menace at the Gate' - 'Drishti' 

Dear Janet, 

Please check our guidelines. 

Attachments are not opened. 

Regards, 

The editors 

On 8 March 2016 at 15:42, Janet Swinney <janet.swinney@zen.co.uk> wrote: 

Hello Indira, 

As the ‘Menace at the Gate’ has now appeared elsewhere, I’m now submitting ‘Drishti’ (attached). 

All the best, and a very happy International Women’s Day! 

Janet 

Janet H Swinney 

freelance writer 

Tel:   020 7635 6770 

Mob: 0796 2208 660 

www.janethswinney.com 

*janet.swinney@zen.co.uk <janet.swinney@zen.co.uk>* 

*From:* The Editors [mailto:outofprintmagazine@gmail.com] *Sent:* 16 February 2016 17:33 *To:* Janet Swinney *Subject:* Re: Sumission only - 'The Menace at the Gate' 

Thanks for letting us know. 

Best regards, 

Indira 

On 16 February 2016 at 21:09, Janet Swinney <janet.swinney@zen.co.uk> wrote: 

Dear Indira, 

I thought I’d better let you know that this story has now been accepted and published by ‘The Bombay Literary Magazine’. You can find it here: 

http://bombayliterarymagazine.com/?p=407 

I’ll send you something else shortly. 

Best wishes. 

Janet 

Janet H Swinney 

freelance writer 

Tel:   020 7635 6770 

Mob: 0796 2208 660 

www.janethswinney.com 

*janet.swinney@zen.co.uk <janet.swinney@zen.co.uk>* 

*From:* The Editors [mailto:outofprintmagazine@gmail.com] *Sent:* 17 January 2016 07:13 *To:* Janet Swinney *Subject:* Re: Sumission only - 'The Menace at the Gate' 

Dear Janet, 

Your story is in the pre-final stage of reading. I just want to make sure it is still available. 

Many thanks, 

Indira 

On 30 November 2015 at 14:25, Janet Swinney <janet.swinney@zen.co.uk> wrote: 

*The Menace at the Gate* 

Thank you for getting in touch. I have pasted my story into the email as requested. It’s lost its footnotes, but that probably won’t matter to an Indian audience. 

Best wishes. 

Janet 

Her period refused to come. Beneath the ineffectual storm created by the ceiling fan, she lay in turmoil. No position brought relief. After days of tossing and turning and lying in limp sheets, her shoulders and her buttocks were disfigured by the blemishes served up by prickly heat. And the monsoon was still an age away. 

Clans of mosquitoes infested the room, convening under the bed, as well as in the adjoining bathroom, where you took your pants down at your peril. Every night, before coming to bed, she fumigated the entire place with Deet *,* and plastered herself with Odomos. It made no difference. The evil empire persisted in rude good health, while she lay upon the bed like a living sacrifice. Despite a monstrous nightgown and cotton socks that came up almost to her knees, her ankles, wrists and toes were swollen with multiple bites, the flesh ripped raw with scratching. 

Her mind was in no better state. Her head was filled with equations that she could not solve. The reek of formaldehyde from the lab was still in her nostrils. She had never guessed when she chose her subjects for Ten Plus One, that even Biology, which was her favourite subject, would involve so much chemistry. She thrashed about the bed, struggling with valencies that were at odds with one another, and the chemical description of photosynthesis that she could not complete. At the same time, fragments of the argument her parents had had that morning rattled round her head. They were covering the same old ground. Her mother wanted a beauty parlour, and was asking for a down payment for land. Her father was adamant that no wife of his was going out to work. Over the months that war had been waged across this terrain, the arguments had got worse: her mother more vitriolic and abusive, her father bitterer and meaner. This morning her mother had shouted at her father, ‘Tu pagal heh!’[1] <#m_-7906438998179395708_632218603_-1046372596_-213591860__ftn1>, while her father had retorted with, ‘Bewaqoof!’[2] <#m_-7906438998179395708_632218603_-1046372596_-213591860__ftn2> Even her brother had been shocked. Not to mention the relatives from the UK who were staying with them. 

Anju gathered that business in the state was going down. Everyone was jittery because of the Sikh separatist hostilities that showed no sign of abating. Only last week, people had been dragged off a bus from Chandigarh and shot for no obvious reason.  So, of course, her father was right to be cautious. On the other hand, she thought her mother would make a good businesswoman who would have her wits about her, so why hold back? Her father was willing to pay for his daughters’ education in the hope that they would become career women, so why not make some investment in his wife? In the meantime, while the matter remained unresolved, the entire household operated in an oppressive atmosphere of unspoken thoughts; unfocused gazes, and evasive action when they encountered each other in the living room. She had no idea how things would end. 

The words ‘xylem’ and ‘phloem’ drifted through her head tangled up with elements from the periodic table. Then came ‘cranial enlargement’, ‘thermodynamic equilibrium’ and ‘infantile dementia’. A cow sauntered past to buy beauty products at her mother’s three-legged market stall. Her father sawed down trees at the corner of the garden to make way for a shamiana. A dog was found to share its genetic origins with a banana. The banana sought an audience with the queen of Panjabi film, Amrita Singh. A balloon drifted off in the direction of Kalistan, taking the film star with it, and leaving her fans behind. No matter how Anju tried, nothing would compute. 

She threw herself to the other end of the bed in the hope of finding a breath of air. Now the rattle of water in the cooler was next to her ears, along with the demented roar of its internal fan. It was like life as she imagined it in an aircraft hangar. She got up and switched the thing off – it served no useful purpose – and launched herself on to her back again. She had begged and pleaded with her parents for a grown-up ‘pad’ away from her obnoxious brother and her feather-brained sister where she could do grown-up things like read novels and listen to film songs. Now that she had it, she could hardly complain about the disadvantages, especially as the room had its own outside door, almost like an apartment. With the cooler off, she heard the motor of the refrigerator kick into action several rooms away, the bottles of water shuddering in the drinks rack. The external screen door banged softly for no apparent reason. And in the back bedroom, her new uncle began to snore like a rutting buffalo. 

Things were no better at school, either. In fact, they were worse. Your parents you were trying to distance yourself from: they were passé; they didn’t know you anymore; they frowned at things you thought were hilarious; they read doom, disaster and shortcoming into your every move. Your friends, on the other hand, you wanted close: they shared your sense of humour; they took pleasure in the same things as you, whether movies or music; they knew exactly what talents you had and appreciated them. But some of Anju’s friends had already left school, some for early marriages and some for secretarial training. Meenakshi was even expecting her first child, the kitsch quotient of her marriage equalled only by her ignorance of matters reproductive. Anju didn’t want any of that. She wanted a career she was genuinely interested in, one she could pursue for many years to come, depending on how marriage turned out, and so she’d decided on immunology, something that would be socially useful. This was what had made her put up so far with the homework, the absolute crate loads of it that she had to drag around every day. This, and having friends to lighten the load. 

But now, her best friend, Gurdeep, had discarded her. It would have been better if they had had an argument. An argument is about something, often a misunderstanding, and there’s a good chance you can patch it up. But Gurdeep had simply said to her one day, ‘Nah, you’re just too boring these days. Always self-absorbed; always complaining about things that don’t interest anyone else. I want some fun.’ And she had turned her attention to a group of Arts students in their year, notably one Dhirendra, a lad with very tight trousers and a quiff of oily hair whom they had both despised when they were a year younger. Anju was devastated. It was humiliating. The contagion of rejection spread, and soon she spent her days ploughing a solitary furrow, shunned by the last of her remaining friends. It made break times difficult and it made her school bag twice as heavy. 

Her nightdress was stifling. Its gathers added unflattering volume to her body, enlarging her aching breasts, and turning her distended abdomen into a mound the size of a village pathi[3] <#m_-7906438998179395708_632218603_-1046372596_-213591860__ftn3>. Ribbons of perspiration threaded their way across every surface of her body and collected in its folds. 

Suddenly, she leaped up and ripped the nightdress off. And with it, the socks. ‘Come, mosquitoes, come!’ she cried out silently, as she flung herself across the bed, naked and cruciform. ‘What more harm can you do?’ Perhaps beyond extreme discomfort and mental anguish there would be some kind of transcendental state that brought relief. 

But no: no matter how hard she tried to will herself into oblivion, a blizzard of unrelated items continued to whirl across her internal field of vision. Her mind was like a South Indian temple, every surface heaving with figures, coupling in unlikely combinations; all of them competing for attention; none of them fully formed, and none of them able to free itself from its ground. An orange glow filled her cranium, pressing at the back of her eyeballs. She felt that at any moment her head might explode. She flailed about desperately in hope of some small respite. Her hips were bruised with twisting and turning on the thin, unforgiving mattress, and mosquitoes screamed shrill descants by her ears. When she had visited a particular chemical equation pointlessly for what seemed like the umpteenth time, ‘Bas!’ she said, ‘Enough!’ and got up. She wrenched the sheet from the bed and wound it around herself sari-style. She shuffled softly to the door, slid the bolt back gently and stepped out into the garden. Ironic that when her parents had debated giving her the room, they considered how easily someone might get in. It had never occurred to them to think about how readily their daughter might get out. 

She stood on the lawn. The grass was oily underfoot. The sunflowers in the borders hung their heads with exhaustion. Nothing stirred. Not even the cicadas that normally hung about in the creeper on the wall. The moon was high and bloated, with a feverish orange stain around it. The pill-box that the Armed Police had constructed on the wall of the Shri Lakshmi Narayan mission, after the separatists had attacked a number of Hindu temples, was deserted. However, further along, at the sentry post next to the gate, a single guard stood on duty. After a while, he gave a muffled cough, and she heard his boots crunch on gravel as he adjusted his weight. 

She stood as still as a statue in her makeshift sari. Then, far away, she heard the whistle of the chowkidar on his rounds. Gradually, he came closer, trailing his lathi along any handy fence. Finally, by the time he got to the end of their lane, she could make out each concussive rattle of the pea in his whistle. The guard shifted his ground, preparing for a diversion. But the chowkidar passed on, intent on his own thoughts, oblivious to the ghost-like figure standing on the lawn. Stick and whistle turned a corner and faded into the distance. 

Anju laughed to herself. What kind of a chowkidar was that, who wouldn’t see a burglary if it was committed under his nose? She had not been afraid that he might see her, though. She had not been afraid at all. She took a few paces further on to the lawn, and adjusted her sagging ‘sari’ in a way she thought might be more becoming. The guard might, or might not, have been watching her. 

A few lanes away, fractious dogs began to squabble, their yelping reverberating from the vast geometry of the blue-black sky. Suddenly the night seemed full of possibilities, offering something very different from the mental drudgery Anju faced on a daily basis; something far away from mind-numbing routine; something exhilarating. She moved as smoothly across the lawn as if she were on castors. Carefully, she lifted the latch on the garden gate and stepped out into the lane. The gravel bit into her feet, sharpening her senses, and she felt a certain thrill at being ‘out of bounds’. She nursed her heavy breasts on her forearm as she held the ‘sari’ close, the nipples standing stiffly to attention. Suddenly, she felt differently about herself: a sense of expansiveness that sat low within her offered itself for fulfilment. This was a far remove from the dead weight she had got used to dragging around. 

It was as though the guard had been expecting her. He was young, his facial expression not yet hardened into that of a seasoned officer, but not so young that he didn’t know what was required of him. He was eager; brusque but not brutal. She pushed him back against the wall. His uniform was coarse and full of hindrances. Her fast and furtive fingers made short work of them. She waited while he undid his trouser buckle, then she dropped the sheet. His body was narrow, his hips hard. The sex was what they both needed: harsh and hasty. He thrust deep inside her, and she drew hard on him. Her body gave commands she was not familiar with and responded to its own orders. Her mind was nowhere. She clutched him by the shoulders, and raised a knee against the wall to get a better purchase. At her ear she could feel his breath and the softness of a young moustache. They coupled with the urgency of two small people in an interminably expanding universe who must take their chances where they find them. When it was over, she hung on to his collar gratefully, and rested her head briefly on his shoulder, but she could not look him in the eye. 

Wordlessly, she dragged the sheet back into the garden, and somehow got back into her room without disturbing the household. Now as she lay on the bed, she felt she had already left home. She fell asleep uncovered by the sheet and with no thought for mosquitoes. 

The following morning was a strange business. She put on her school uniform – it looked ridiculous – and took it off again. Instead, she put on a modest salwar chemise and went into the dining room. Her parents were busy pretending they weren’t rowing, for the benefit of the visitors from the UK, but were clearly on a collision course. Anju couldn’t be bothered to try and decipher exactly what was going on. Her mother frowned at her briefly, something about her daughter’s appearance catching her attention, but then got distracted by the cold war. Anju buttered herself a piece of toast, smothered it with raspberry jam, smiled at her new auntie and uncle and hefted her bag of books out to the school bus. 

No-one wanted to sit next to her. She didn’t care. As the vehicle wove between the military check-points that had been set up all across town, she looked around benignly at her fellow passengers. Too much gossiping! What was there that required so much yakkety-yak? Latest hits and such, she supposed. Whatever it was, it no longer mattered to her. She was in a class of her own now. She smiled inwardly. As the bus trundled along, she opened her bag and slid her text books out through the window bars, one by one. She watched small children and dogs run out from ditches and drains to see what gift had been left for them. She felt totally liberated. They, on the other hand, were going to be really disappointed. 

She lied her way through the first half of the day: ‘Sorry, miss, I think my brother’s taken it by mistake’, ‘Sorry sir, I couldn’t finish it: my tooth was paining.’ All through some ineffably boring Physics demonstration that involved the use of a vernier caliper, she sat looking out through a gap between the buildings at a smudge in the distance where the foothills started up from the plains. One day soon, perhaps, she could be wandering there in the clear mountain air, serenaded by music and caressed by blossom as in the best romantic film scenes. When it came to the practical, she didn’t even try to complete it. 

In the early afternoon, her euphoria started to dispel. She could hear the thump of munitions and the occasional crack of small arms fire out in the direction of the cantonment. The day was turning muggy again. Even minus the school uniform, she felt hot and bothered. Slowly, it dawned on her that without money she was going nowhere; without passing her exams, she would be unable to go to college, and if she did not graduate and become a professional lady who earned money, then she would be parcelled off to some local buddhu[4] <#m_-7906438998179395708_632218603_-1046372596_-213591860__ftn4> whom, knowing her father, she might have very little say in choosing. 

And what if her period never came? What if, after nine months, her body exploded and gave forth a baby? She, better than anyone, should have been able to guard against this possibility. The ins and outs of the human reproductive system were even on their curriculum. How could she have been so stupid? 

She sat up late that night, listening to old film songs on her radio. Or rather, not listening, but gripped by terror as plaintive melodies lilted by, one after another. She didn’t know the first thing about having a baby. She didn’t *want* a baby. She couldn’t imagine herself in such a situation. The whole business of garnering another being from within yourself and pushing it out into the world was too grotesque. But before she even got to that, there was the matter of how she would break the shameful truth to her parents. They would be appalled, and their fury would be boundless. She would have ruined things for them. They would become social outcasts, unwelcome in every outpost of their family, and she would be some ugly pariah, hated by herself as well as by everyone else. The truth was unspeakable. She couldn’t do it: she couldn’t tell her parents. She would rather die. 

There was nothing to do but wait, and that meant strapping on the uniform again; figuring out how to catch up with her homework and trying to get hold of the textbooks she had discarded at a point in the school year when they couldn’t easily be replaced. 

The days passed wretchedly, and the nights too, with the fan battering against the ceiling and the cooler keeping up its incessant din. Her body was not complying with the laws of nature. It did nothing. Except, perhaps, inflate: the waistband of her school skirt got so tight, she felt faint when she bent over, and her bra bit into her flesh like the rope on a cotton bale. Her ankles had lost their definition, and her toes were like little loqats[5] <#m_-7906438998179395708_632218603_-1046372596_-213591860__ftn5>. As the days ticked by, her sense of dread increased. 

Meanwhile, her mother had noticed the logjam in proceedings. She threatened Anju with a visit to the doctor’s. 

‘I can’t go. I can’t miss school. We’re doing important stuff.’ 

‘This is important stuff. You can’t let matters like these drag on. They need to be sorted out. Otherwise, you don’t know what all problems you will have in the future.’ 

‘I hate it,’ said Anju. ‘You can’t see him in private. You have to sit there and tell him all personal stuff in front of half the town. Last time I heard a woman telling him all about her discharge. In technicolour. It was disgusting.’ 

‘Grow up!’ said her mother. ‘Everyone has such problems. You’re no different. He’s a good homoeopath. He cured you overnight when you were tiny and had whooping cough. And he treats the police horses for free.’ 

Anju snorted in disdain. ‘I’m not going!’ 

But finally, her mother did get her way. One morning Anju found her braced in the frame of the external door, barring her way. 

‘Right, madam, you can put your school bag down. We’re not having this tamasha[6] <#m_-7906438998179395708_632218603_-1046372596_-213591860__ftn6> any longer. We’re going to the doctor’s.’ 

They set off across town in a rickshaw. Although she’d applied an avalanche of talcum powder to herself, Anju’s cleavage was already wet and her palms clammy. ‘Now,’ said her mother, ‘when we get there, sab kuch das de.[7] <#m_-7906438998179395708_632218603_-1046372596_-213591860__ftn7> Leave nothing out.’ Anju hung her head. She didn’t think so. 

But when they arrived at the surgery, they found the whole place in turmoil. The yard that served as the waiting room was filled with a jostling throng of distraught people. Men were shouting and women wailing. Someone was waving a crutch over someone else’s head. A woman in a yellow sari was kneeling in the garden, tearing at her hair. The crooked plastic chairs normally used to seat the patients in orderly rows were in disarray, and some had been knocked to the ground. Patients were jammed in the doorway to the doctor’s consulting room trying to elbow their way in past each other. ‘What’s going on? asked Anju’s mother. Eventually, she had to grab the arm of an elderly mali in a dirty shirt. ‘What’s happened?’ She hung on to his arm, insisting on an answer. 

But the cry went up from elsewhere: ‘They’ve killed him! The bastards have killed him! Straight through the head!’ The hubbub grew. Everyone wanted to see with their own eyes; to know for sure. What were the sick to do without their healer? How would the lame walk and the blind see? 

And Anju and her mother were no different from the rest. But it was some time, in all the confusion, before they could fight their way to the consulting room door. And there the doctor lay behind his desk, his head protruding at one end, a sock and shoe at the other, the face that had been formed in friendly greeting now starting to look tired. An indecent orifice gaped at the centre of his forehead in the position of the third eye. Anju wiped her hand across her mouth, and felt her throat was dry. Her mother started to bleat. 

That evening, the family abandoned their usual practice of sitting out on the porch after dinner, trying to catch the last breath of the day. It felt too dangerous. The servant had gone home early to avoid the curfew, and Anju’s brother had sent word to say he’d been kept late at college and would lie low with a friend. The three of them – mother, father, and daughter – huddled in the claustrophobic living room with their UK relatives, with the fan whirring and the curtains flapping, lamenting the death of the doctor. 

‘So generous,’ sobbed Anju’s mother. ‘Always a kind word. So good with the little ones.’ 

‘What I don’t understand,’ said Anju’s English auntie, ‘is why anyone would want to kill a doctor.’ 

‘They’re saying in the market it was that business with the horses,’ said her father. 

‘So now horses are their enemy?’ her mother wailed. 

‘They said because he helped the Armed Police he was fraternising with the enemy.’ 

‘Jakkar na maar! Ludicrous!’ declared Anju’s mother. ‘Have people no compassion?’ 

They sat together for some time pondering the whys and wherefores of the turmoil that was unfolding all around them. Anju wondered what her alien auntie made of it all. They had bribed government officials to get her a permit to enter the state. Anju wondered if she would have come at all, if she had known what she was letting herself in for. With her short hair and knee-length skirts, she looked lost and completely out of place. 

Anju went to bed early in her separate apartment. It had been a narrow escape for her, but at what price? She lay on her back with the light on, watching the ceiling fan clank round. Where would it all end? 

In fact, it was English Auntie’s alien qualities that meant that Anju felt some affinity with her. Just once or twice, in odd moments over the breakfast table, for example, she was tempted to turn to her for help. She would begin to form the words of some English sentences in her head, and then English Auntie would catch her eye and smile, and ask her some banal question about her day at school or her interests, and Anju would freeze, stammer a word or two and drop her eyes. Except once, that is: when English Auntie asked if she had any boyfriends. Anju saw her mother’s head snap round on its neck. ‘My God, no!’ Anju declared. ‘No, never.’ She had enough words available in her English vocabulary for that. 

The end of month tests came round. Anju did worse than everyone except she herself expected, and uncomfortable enquiries were launched over the dinner table. Her father, briefly and uncharacteristically sympathetic, conjectured that her poor performance might be due to her anxieties about the ongoing conflict, or a rumour that had been going around that some schools might close because of the troubles. Only Anju knew different. She promised to try harder, but her head was so packed with cotton wool that she couldn’t think straight, and her fat fingers were too stiff to produce a decent diagram. Haggard, nauseous and with black patches under her eyes due to lack of sleep, she slogged to school every day like a manual labourer with a penchant for alcohol. 

The newspapers were full of menace and desperate deeds. Pak was threatening to make incursions into Kashmir, and the separatists were threatening to make Punjab into a no-go area. Twenty people in Kurukshetra were seriously ill in hospital because they had drunk contaminated milk, and a headless torso had been found in a ditch in Kapurthala. Three year nine year-old children from Khanna’s Model Town had hanged themselves from a ceiling fan. Two sisters and a cousin all gone in one fell swoop, afraid that they would disgrace their parents in the end of year exams. Closer to home, the Armed Police had brought in customised agricultural machines with high-rise wheels to flush out terrorists hiding in among the sugar cane. 

Anju pored over the photograph of the children’s sad little corpses. How she admired them for what they had done! What courage and logistical planning it had taken to pull this off. How she longed for such a release! Time was running out for her. The business with the doctor had, after all, been a deferment and not a solution. She had already been considering whether her own careful plan would involve phenol, the rat poison under the kitchen sink, the painkillers her mother kept in a drawer to treat a recurring back problem, or the razor her father used every day. And now the children had given her another idea. She decided to give herself until the week-end when things would be easier to arrange. 

That Friday night, she fell into bed exhausted, after struggling with a series of velocity-time graphs and the laws of thermodynamics. She was wiped out, vanquished, had nothing left to offer. She was asleep before she could remember to switch off the radio. While singers crooned softly throughout the night, and the terrorists crept through the fields towards the next victims on their list, her body thought things over and decided to free itself from the grip of inertia. The first blood it released leaked quietly from between her thighs. Anju sighed and turned over in her deep, dreamless sleep. 

By the time morning came, a dark stain with gelatinous deposits had soaked the sheet, and smeared itself across her body. For the first time, she did not regard this as a nuisance. She stuffed the sheet into a bucket of Rin, and and went out joyfully to the market to eat as much falooda[8] <#m_-7906438998179395708_632218603_-1046372596_-213591860__ftn8> as she could manage. 

On Monday morning, in Biology, she handled the slides for a series of experiments on the cell structure of plants so deftly that it won praise from her teacher.  Later on she produced a depiction of the chloroplast with such accurate attention to detail that it was reminiscent of a Mughal miniature. She was back on form! 

No-one commented on her change of mood. Things at home continued in the usual vein, but she got into one or two conversations with girls in Plus Two who were preparing to go to medical college, and this raised some interesting options she had not considered. Eventually, end-of-year exams came. She sat them and acquitted herself well. Then, they were on vacation, and though she kicked about at a loose end with nothing to do and no-one to do it with – it was too risky even to contemplate a trip to either the cinema or the bazaar, for example – it was not a bad experience. She knew that when school resumed, she would be giving her full attention to the Ampère versus Biot-Savart problem, and her study of the musculoskeletal system. In the meantime, she amused herself reading *Wuthering Heights* and *The Broken Bridge* by Jagdish Vaidya. 

The monsoon broke, and swept through the land, washing it clean of dissent and destruction. One night, in Ropar district, the Armed Police harvested twenty terrorists, and finished them off. No questions asked either by state or by central government. There was a collective sigh of relief in many quarters. The pill-box on the temple wall was dismantled. The sentry box remained but was already crumbling. The Armed Police went back to barracks. The family’s British relatives caught their flight back home. Anju started preparing her application for college. She had shifted her focus from Immunology to Reproductive Health and Population Management. She never saw the young guard again. 


Bio: I am based in London, am married to an Indian and travel frequently to India. I have had ten stories published by independent publishers as a result of entering competitions. My story, ‘The Work of Lesser-Known Artists’, was a runner-up in the London Short Story Competition 2014 and will appear shortly in an e-anthology. ‘The Map of Bihar’ was published both in the UK (Earlyworks Press, 2012) and in the USA (Hopewell publications). It was nominated for the Eric Hoffer award for prose 2012. I have had work shortlisted in the Fish International short story and the Norwich Writers’ Circle competitions and highly commended in the Bristol short story competition. In 2008, I was a semi-finalist in the ‘Guardian’ newspaper’s international development journalism competition with an article I wrote about the education of girls in Afghanistan. Further information about my work is available on my website. The address is given below. 

