From: Wilson Varghese <aaluvaputhussery@gmail.com>
Date: 6 May 2016 at 20:08
Subject: submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

I am a business man based in Mumbai, this is my first attempt at satire writing. Hope you like my writing, your feedback will be appreciated. 

*Aliens in my head* 

(Aluvaputhussery) 

Halfway through a lovely dream aliens entered my head. Disturbed by their mystifying voices I asked the intruders. 

"Why are you in my head? 

"Just to watch your dream" came the answer with a celestial boom. "We happened to be passing by, heard some music coming from your head. Peeped in ". 

"But how come I can't see you?" I wondered. 

"Oh! That's a human fault” explained the alien. “You humans think all that exists can be seen. Well! Dreamer. Do you see sound?” 

“No”, I said. 

"Does that mean that sounds do not exist?” 

“No". I said again. 

"Listen carefully! Your grey lobes cannot perceive this easily. You humans have material form. We have energy form or sound form. Do you get it now?” asked the alien arrogantly. 

"Yes, I see it” I replied. 

"No, stupid. You never see us. You only hear us”.  The alien was disdainful. 

“Yes I hear you” I agreed meekly. But how come you are in my head?” 

The alien replied casually “Oh, that's just an accident. We were on our way out from Delhi at night. Suddenly day broke. We had to hide somewhere. Your ear was the closest hole. So we sneaked in. But I should thank you old man, your dream show we enjoyed. " 

I was puzzled.  Why aliens in Delhi? 

The alien was hurt. "Don't call us aliens. We are sonarians, a sub group of galaxians”. 

“Sorry” I apologised. 

The alien continued. “You humans have a manufacturing defect.” 

“What” I objected. “We are created by god”. 

A laughter boomed back.”  “Silly man, you think god has time to waste on humans. You are an outsourced job dear. Like Apple made in China. That's how the defect crept in”. 

"What defect? And who made humans?" I was intrigued. 

"Hold on." Said the Sonarian. "The money minded Luminarians made humans. They were start-ups. Wanted quick bucks”. 

"Are they different from you?” to my mind all aliens looked same like buffaloes. Couldn’t tell one from another. 

“Yes, very much. An upper cast, mostly traders, cheat on everything quality, weight, and tax”. 

"Cut to Delhi” l said. We were moving off track. 

"Well, resumed the alien. We got an assignment from our company to correct the manufacturing defects in humans.” 

I couldn’t endure the “defect” slur.  “Come to the point, Sonarian." I am asking about Delhi 

The alien was annoyed and shot back “Pollution, you pea brained human, Pollution.” 

I laughed aloud. “Ha ha, funny, you guys came from stars to check pollution in Delhi”. 

Still angry the alien continued. 

“You humans can't grasp it easily. Listen. Our company which is running Delhi noticed that smoke, dust and noise pollute Delhi. Citizens breathe heavy smoke and hear loud noises. They checked your design and found it faulty. The Luminarians who made you provided shutters for your mouth and eyes but not for your nose and ears. Crooks saved the money”. 

I thought the alien is insane. But I found some logic in his madness. Decided to play along. "Listen my friend” I said. “I have an idea.” 

The alien was receptive and said "OK, what's it". 

“Recall all the defective pieces and refit.” A free ride to cosmos too was on my mind. 

"We had considered it?”  Alien’s answer disappointed me.” 

Alien explained. “The numbers make it difficult. Moreover by the time we finish one half, the other half will double. You breed like rabbits”. 

"That's true” I said. Make Govt. cut reproduction”. I was still hoping for a cosmic trip. 

Alien disagreed again "We had thought of that too. Even made a survey. The major community said "Cut the minority" the minor said “cut them, we will pay double”. Our company said “forget it”. Our boss is a democrat.  Wanted consensus”. 

"What have your company decided then?" I was edgy. 

"The alien boasted. Our team didn't give up. They got to the root of the problem.” 

“There is no root or top. You are just making a long story. When will you quit my ear?” I asked. 

“Cool down and listen” He said.” The Luminarians had created air, water and land on earth. Then they made fish, birds and animals”. 

I couldn't take the sermon anymore. "You are just narrating the bible. Cut it and get to the point”.  Alien obliged. “Finally they put the intelligence in the wrong head”. 

"Which wrong head "I asked.” 

“Monkeys, man, monkeys”. He said. “Then the monkeys evolved. They made cars. They burned oil. Polluted the whole world”. 

I laughed. “Great discovery. That's why u call us foolish”. 

"I never said u are foolish. I said u are defective. He clarified. The Luminarians made the mistake”. 

"No mistake.” I said. We are the most intelligent. I asserted. 

"But misplaced brains”. Interrupted the alien. “Had they put intelligence in birds head? You humans would have flown around. No cars. No smoke. No pollution”. 

At the end of each interaction with the alien my ego is punctured. I itched to pay back. Should smash his theory of alien hand in creation of humans. Decided to approach living gods. Searched for a swami. 

Alien chuckled. “You can't get them on corporate working days”. 

Flew to Rome. “Hand of aliens or Maradona’s, ultimately it’s the hand of God”, said Pope. 

Reached London. Hawking received with a smile and motioned to wait. Removed his ear phones and greeted. “Welcome to celebrate. I just picked up an alien voice from 150 million light years. What can I do for you?” I recounted my story. Hawking bounced in his seat. Called out loud. “Andy, Lucy, Harry all come in. Aliens can travel as sound waves and take form as insects. There are some in his head. Scan him quick and extract”. 

“I protested. No, no; there are no insects.  Why only in my head? Why not yours too? You too heard them just a while ago”. 

“Yes that's what we want to find out. Why only in your head? 

He tempted me with an offer “If you co-operate we will name the insects after your family”. 

“No way”. I said. 

He upped the offer. ” If anything goes wrong we will preserve your head like mummies of Egypt. Your insect head will live forever”. 

I ran for my life. At Heathrow I was looking for Mumbai- counter. Noticed a guy sitting on the floor with an empty bottle. Felt for him. Need help bhai? 

⁠⁠He held the bottle up and said. They took away all my bottles. Oh. I was about to turn back. The drunk continued. I am hounded. 

By whom, for what? I asked. 

Indians, I only flew as a bird. Kingfisher. They say, the project was to clean only the air but I cleaned up everything. 

Just then I noticed some men running in. Hawking’s men?  I ducked behind the kingfisher man. He sensed my nervousness.” Need help bhai?” He pulled out a pint.” Diageo sends my share regularly” he said. 

I downed it in one gulp. The bottled courage shot up to my head. I bawled. This can't go on. We are humans. The most superior of all creations of God. How can this tiny chip of sound sticking in my ear say who created whom? Is this all just illusion only in my head? Or is he a transformed conman? I jerked in bed. The alien came on instantly. 

Don't disturb. It’s an interesting scene in your dream show. He said. 

“Shut the crap” I shouted. This is all made up. You are just not there. There are no Sonarians, nor Luminarians. We are not created by those cracks either. Our holy books say it. Puranas say the triad Brahma Vishnu Maheswara created us. The Greek say we were created from love. Bible says we were created in a week by god. Koran says creation was in phases. Sutta says we evolved. So says Darvin too. You galaxians are fakes. You too are a fake. Sound cannot have form. You are not in my ear. You are only a part of my dream. I threw up on him in one burst all that I had swallowed from Google but couldn't digest. Felt good. I have knocked him out. He is gone for good. There was peace and tranquility for a minute. Then the boom came back. 

“Are you finished?”  Asked the alien. 

“Yes I have. You too are finished.” I said. 

“Not so fast human. Listen to me. Why do you look in books to trace your creation? Just look around you. Be earthy when on earth. Who makes the mud pot for you?  The potter not Michael Angelo. Who makes your knife? A black Smith not Thomas Edison. A carpenter makes your table not Write brothers. They create worthy things like Madonna, electric bulbs and aero plane. How come you think god himself would sit down and waste time for a third rate organism with fourth rate brain? Such menial jobs are done by lowly helpers like Luminarians. Don't ever imagine you are equal to us who are created by god.” 

The booze had waned and I was a mouse again. I bowed. “Pranam guru.” I said and moved to check in. The bird man said.  “Feel free to ask if you need help. Bon voyage.” 

Alien whispered. “Ask for a calendar dreamer.” 

I took the check- in queue for Mumbai. The guy in front had a gadget in hand. Looked like a fishing rod.” Hello”. I greeted him. He turned around taking care not to damage the gadget. That's when I noticed his attire. You look ethnic I said. An oversized colourful turban with a tail over his shoulder.  Long loose jubba over pyjama with pointed gold colour maharaja shoes. 

“Snake charmer” He explained. And this too is a snake charmer. He showed me the contraption. “Snake catcher”. I corrected. 

“Yes.  But it catches snakes by charming. Look at the flute at the tip. It plays 20 different ragas for regional snakes.  See this cosy coiled tube for them to settle. That feeding bottle holds fresh cow’s milk. 

What are you going to do with it? Catch snakes in Mumbai. 

No man. I am going to Mumbai mela. The “make in India” one to look for a start-up. He read the scepticism in my eyes. 

Believe me. Indians worship snakes and would not like to torture them .this will be a hit. 

Move ahead. Contempt was pronounced in my voice. 

Just as I shook him off the guy behind tapped my shoulder. 

I am heading for the mela too. He said. 

Hello, I greeted. Black silk vest with satin coat and trousers white shirt with a bow a tall Jewish hat with a red plume. 

Magician? I queried. 

No. But I have magic in this. He held up a spray gun and smiled. 

“You wish to sell mosquito repellent?” 

“No mosquito modifier” he corrected. 

“Ha ha, we have a lot of your ilk in our country. They lure with names like good night, sweet dreams, bed mate and so on.” 

“Trust me” he pleaded. “This one is different. It modifies the biting habits of mosquitoes. One mosquito will bite only one man once. Suck 30 per cent minority blood 10 of SCs and 5 tribal.” 

“Ha ha why can't you kill them instead?” 

“No. We respect Gandhiji and ahimsa.” 

I gaped. Looked at those in the queue. Eccentrics holding odd contraptions.  Checked the counter sign board to make sure. Mumbai flight or to some island resort of Donald trump? 

Mumbai airport was full of ‘make in India’ freaks. They moved in posh car convoys to the ‘make in India’ mela. Curiosity took me along. Traditionally dressed girls decked the guests with colourful Rajput turbans, garlanded with madras marigold, dabbed with holi gulal and welcomed in kathakali posture. The place looked like Rajasthan camel bazaar. Mosquito man came up on stage holding his spray gun for presentation in the afternoon. 

Audience took him for a Magician and clapped. He too bowed like one and said “I am an American Magician but my magic is in this gun. He mocked aiming the spray gun at the audience menacingly. They let out a terrified cry, ducked under chairs, jumped over others, some froze, and few passed out. Don't panic, this is no gun, no gun just a spray, look look. The magician sprayed the liquid all around to convince the audience.  Conductor took over, order, order please, he said. There is no gun, no fire. It was just a prank.  Our security is checking every one again. I hid my face like Peter lest someone accuse 'this man was with him'.  As calm returned the Conductor ordered the magician “take over, but stick to your text”. Magician took the mike and said “Sorry guys and girls.  That was a joke misfired. In any case we Americans shoot only school kids not business men.” 

That made an American jump up in fury.  “Renegades like you insult our nation. What kids? Don't you know our valiant Navy Seals smoked out Osama from his hole and shot him”. 

A Pakistani in the next seat jeered. “Bull shit. Rotten bull shit”. 

His Indian friend nudged him. “Check your words. This is India.” “Sorry, holy shit” he corrected. 

“Osama was shot, sealed and delivered for quarter billion by our ISI blokes”. 

“Calm down.” The magician pleaded and proceeded. “This spray modifies the genetic habits of mosquitoes. You can make them bite whom you want, when, where and how long. Democrats or Republicans in America, minorities or scheduled in India, Protestants or Catholics in UK, Sunnis or Shias in Pakistan take your pick.” Suddenly the hall came alive. TV guy's closed in. Business men followed.  Can u change the targets? , how many in one shot? how long the effect lasts? , everyone wanted to talk to him. 

There was a mob around. They pushed, pulled and dragged him around. To his luck loud speakers blared. "Please move to the beach venue for the cultural programme". Ushers guided everyone to waiting vehicles. Many seemed to be trailing him. To my surprise security men had to cordon him off from a crowd when he alighted. Yet many big netas were trying to get close to him. Half an hour into the program the stage caught fire. Lights went out. Utter confusion. By the time order was restored no one knew who went where. Even as all missing guests were traced, mosquito magician was missing. A manhunt was ordered. Alien warned. This time Peter will be picked up. There is no rooster in chowpatty beach to call time. 

I fled to the airport. 

Headlines screamed in the morning. Atom bomb in spray gun, terminator as Magitian, killer vanished. Police rounded up every one with a spray. Aunties watering window plants, girls colouring hair, barbers from saloons, sign board painters. Police stations overflowed. Political parties accused each other of kidnapping the mosquito man. Saffrons said the tricolour leader has taken him to the usual place of his escapades. Tricolours said they saw him fleeing with some Godmen in fancy dress. Broom men said it’s a joint conspiracy to infect them. TV channels lined up experts. Cacophony time’s   anchor outshouted panellists. I’ve proof in my hand. This page of Washington post was planted to mislead. But it smells fried rice. He for sure is a Chinese terrorist. Nose dive TV’s lady trooper touched down in front line. Trapped some mosquitoes. She broke news with a lab report. Mosquitoes have already been modified. Half of the samples tested had majority blood, a third minority and 10th OBC. Rest had empty stomachs since there were no tribals in the mela. 

When lights went out magician picked up his spray gun and emptied it, Left the gadget and ran to the road.  Hailed a cab, “Airport” he said. 

“Hundred dollars” said the cabby. “Santacruz or Sahara?”  Seeing the Magician confused cabby clarified “Chatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Antarashtria Hawai Adda”. 

“Oh, sounds like Timbuktu” exclaimed the magician. 

Overhearing him cabby said “Sahar is two hundred.” 

“OK. Go fast.” 

As he left him the cabby gracefully invited the white man "Sir, whenever feel come make in India we free open make anywhere anytime.” 

I noticed the snake charmer in a corner of the check in area. He looked dejected.   “Hello, sold your snake catcher?” 

“No man, I lost everything in the fire.” 

“Sorry. Waiting to fly back?” 

“Want to but….” 

“But what, you need some dough?” 

“I managed that selling my RayBan and Nike, but police took my passport.” 

“For what?” 

“They say, multi- brand retail is not allowed in India.” 

“I thought it’s risky to remain in Mumbai. Where should I hide?” 

Alien suggested,   “Delhi, where else? That's where all of them roam free. Thieves, criminals, rapists, netas, fugitives.” 

"Fly free” I corrected him. “Yes, Delhi is the right choice. Would love to see pollution free Delhi with everyone flying.” 

“Sorry pal, we had to suspend the scheme.” 

“Oh, no what's the new story?” 

Well, said the alien, we planned to try the plan with a selected group for a week. Presented to parliament. The whole house jumped at it. Volunteered to be birds but not of same feathers. One group said their bhagwan travelled on a peacock, so they wish to be peacocks. Another said their god descended on earth in the form of a dove. A third said eagle is their holy bird. The Broom men said their choice is the lowly scavenger crow. Our company said at best the birds could be of different colours. Different birds is impractical. The house approved the proposal with only one amendment that the sardarji birds could wear turbans. 

The company decided to go ahead immediately. Or we will be drowned in more amendments they said. 

American TV picked up the bird story. Trump said eagles are OK with me if the Democrats are chick ling’s. Beyoncé said she would love to be a duck and duckiliceous. 

Our ground crew warned. Anything can happen if all colours fly together. 

Don't worry, they will all be remote controlled. Said the company. 

Just as they set out to parliament next morning every MP became a bird, saffron, tricolour, red, blue, and many other. Birds of same colour flew in flocks. Public rushed out and watched the spectacle in amazement. They applauded the fly past as they passed above. In the lead was the largest flock of Saffron. The Tricolours were next and the rest close behind. 

As the Tricolours passed racecourse road plop came down a blob ejected by the head bird. His flock imitated their leader loyally. Tricolour blobs dotted every roof. 

Saffron were furious, their flock curved to Mughal lane, swooped down and carpet bombed. The lane was plastered saffron. The flocks that followed took the opportunity to settle scores. They flew helter-skelter bombing their foes. 

Hell broke loose on the ground. Fans and followers fought on street. Threw stones, broke cars, set buses on fire, cut off power, and looted shops. Police charged. Lathis, tear gas, bullets. Ambulance sirens blared incessantly. 

Our field team panicked. Their Frantic messages jammed the head office. 

"Worry not. Disabled in-flight ejector ". Came the reply. 

To hell! Screamed back the team. All will shit in the parliament. 

"No big deal." Said the company. That's what they were doing all the time in the house.  Verbally. 

Government called off the program. 

Alien was unusually quiet for long. For once his plans failed. 

Supressing a chuckle I sympathised.” I am sorry this happened to you”. 

Alien sounded disheartened. That didn't just happen. He said, it was made to happen. 

"How? Who? I asked. 

“Luminarians”, they could not stomach that we were rectifying their blunder. Their team commissioned an Italian arms dealer for the job. 

What job? Sabotage? I asked. 

The job was to lace the morning tea of all MPs with laxative on the day of flight. 

That is an impossible task. I expressed my doubt. No one can do that. 

"They did" said the alien. The Italian renewed his contacts with his confidante, a godman in Delhi. Offered a million dollars. The cunning holy fox sized up the prey. "That will involve hundreds of greedy phoneys like swamis, astrologers, mullas, monks, munis and priests who can chew this million as after-mint.  To make them feed the MPs laced prasad on that morning” serve them a twelve course dinner. Five million-, said the godman. The guy pocketed full amount in advance. 

The luminarian warned the godman. It is big risk with so many involved in the plot. 

Leave that to me. Said the godman with a roguish glint in his eyes. He conspired with the in-house astrologer of the tricolour leader. Judas betrayed his master. Offered prasad for an auspicious beginning. 

But how could that make every tricolour purge in-flight? I couldn't understand. 

“That's called in - party democracy in India”. Said the alien. When a leader shits all chamchas will replicate in unison or their holes will be plugged. 