From: sumitra madireddy <sumitra.madireddy@gmail.com>
Date: 4 April 2016 at 21:56
Subject: Submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

*Biographical Sketch*: *Sumi Madireddy is an independent content creator, having worked on blog and web content for over five years. She also enjoys writing fiction and creative non-fiction, and is an active member of the Bangalore Writer’s Workshop Community. On languid afternoons, she likes to color, bake, pluck at stringed instruments, and dream of chocolate factories. She blogs at sumispoke.wordpress.com <http://sumispoke.wordpress.com>.* 

*Expatriate* 

Sneha watched as her parents sealed the windows in her room with packing tape. 

“It’s only been 8 years. We can’t go back so soon,” said amma. Daddy grunted in response. 

“We haven’t saved enough. Who will give you a job back home? I haven’t completed my teacher’s training yet. What about the future?” amma continued. “What about Sneha’s school? Who will give her admission in the middle of the year? What’s going to happen to us?” 

Sneha had noticed that lately amma talked a lot about the future, but daddy never replied. He read his newspaper in silence, or sometimes went to sleep. Although they didn’t seem angry with each other, things felt different at home. 

“Why won’t you say anything?” amma’s voice broke. She flung the tape and scissors to a corner, sat on the carpet and began to bawl. Sneha froze. She’d never seen amma like this. 

Daddy sat down beside amma. Sneha thought he wore the same expression like the time he explained to her why she must never drink her eye drops. But he didn’t say anything. He just put his arms around amma. Sneha stayed rooted to her chair. She wasn’t sure if she was supposed leave, maybe they hadn’t realized she was there. She wondered if they would be angry when they found out. 

“Come here, Sneha,” daddy finally called. She got up and tiptoed across the room, still unsure. But when daddy stretched out his arm, she knew it was okay. She ran up to him and he pulled her into his lap. They stayed that way for a long time. 

*** 

As the bell rang, Sneha marched in line to the assembly hall. The kids behind her were whispering in excitement. “My father got them yesterday evening, ours came in green army bags.” That was Ankita’s voice. 

“Ours too,” said Farah. 

“What about you, Sneha? Did your father get them?” Someone prodded her back. Sneha looked down at her shoes, shaking her head. 

*** 

Amma served noodles as Sneha watched Bugs Bunny. This was the only time she had the TV to herself; when daddy was home these days they watched CNN. He wanted to hear everything about the Gulf War. Sneha loved and missed her cartoons, but that evening she had eyes only for the clock. The little hand was almost at 5 and it was taking forever for the big hand to reach 12. Daddy would be home any minute now. 

When the doorbell rang, she leaped out of the sofa and ran to unlock the door. The moment daddy stepped in, she was all over him. 

“Did you get it? Did you get it?” she squealed, attempting to climb onto him. 

Daddy was smiling; she could already see that he was lugging a huge plastic cover. The goods had arrived. 

“Sneha, leave daddy alone, let him wash up first,” amma ordered. 

Later that evening they gathered around as daddy brought the bags out one-by-one and placed them on the dining table, three in all. 

“Gas masks,” he announced, to no one in particular. 

Sneha felt reassured, they were just like Ankita had said, green. She was worried they would give daddy the wrong ones and he wouldn’t know. 

“This one must be for Sneha,” said amma, picking up the smallest bag and ripping apart the Velcro. A floppy mask fell out and before Sneha could see it properly, daddy and amma started to put it on her. It smelled funny inside, rubbery. It felt funny too, she couldn’t hear or see very well and her head was quite heavy. When she held up her hand to touch her face, it met something hard and round protruding near her mouth. 

She nodded and shook her head. “Mmmm, mmmmmm,” she said, trying to hear the sound of her own voice. Amma and daddy were trying on their masks. 

The siren sounded just then. They looked at each other for a brief second before daddy rushed to get the remote. When he changed the channel to Saudi TV, the screen turned red – that was the signal! Amma had the blanket ready; they huddled in a corner of the living room as she covered all three of them. They were to stay that way until the siren went off and the TV showed the green alert. 

“Stay close, Sneha.” The voice was muffled, but Sneha could tell it was daddy. 

They’d been through this before, but it was the first time with the gas masks. She couldn’t wait to tell the others at school. She kept touching her face to make sure it wasn’t a dream. 

*** 

At dinner time, amma handed Sneha a plate of steamed rice mixed with mango pickle, and aaloo fry. It was her favorite meal, but she was growing tired of it now. “If only we could have some ice cream,” she thought. But she didn’t say it out loud. Daddy might go out to the bakalah around the corner and she didn’t like it very much when he left the house these days. 

“Daddy, did they give you the gas masks in your office?” 

“Yes, nana,” said daddy, his eyes glued to the TV. They’d been having all their meals in the living room ever since the war had started. 

“Even mine and Sneha’s?” amma asked, almost immediately. 

Daddy set the plate on his lap, took off his glasses, rubbed his eyes and sighed. “No, I had to buy those.” 

Amma frowned. She didn’t look happy. “But this is war time…” 

“You know how things are, Ishwari. We can’t argue with their rules. I don’t have family status, there ends the matter.” 

Sneha knew what ‘family status’ was. Radhika's father had it and Vaishnavi's too. It meant that they could buy the fancy stationery and their father’s companies would pay for it. It also meant that they went to the swimming pool at the club every weekend, and they could go to India every year without paying for the plane ticket. 

“Don’t worry,” daddy was saying. “We can return them for money once the war is over.” 

“*If* the war is over,” said amma. 

*** 

“Dishoom! Dishoom! Take that!” yelled Bush. Saddam’s contorted form keeled and fell on the bed with a loud thud. A second later he was back on his feet, throwing punches with renewed vigour. Thatcher watched on with an expression of worry, nursing her elbow. 

They had been playing all morning in Mazhar’s room. Mazhar got to choose first because it was his house, so he was always George Bush. Shyam automatically became Saddam Hussein and Sneha was Margaret Thatcher. Sometimes they let Anisa be Gorbachev, but she was too small so she mostly watched. The countries would fight it out to the death on the battleground - Mazhar’s large bed. Sneha didn’t like the game very much, she’d always been pretty bad at fighting. She would lose all the time and at night she would pray for secret strength to defeat the boys the next day. 

Sneha and her parents had been living with four other Indian families in the past week, and this was the last day. After the school was shut down and the airport too, daddy and his friends had decided it would be better to stay together in one house until the companies found a way to send the families back to India. Daddy would have to stay back though; the Industrial City where he went to work had not been closed. Daddy helped amma pack only the important stuff before they locked up the apartment. 

“That’s enough of playing, kids. It’s time to go now,” called Yasmin aunty, Mazhar’s mother. 

*** 

Sneha looked out of the window as she sipped a carton of orange Suntop. She couldn’t play on the bus because all the kids had to sit next to their mothers. But she could see daddy on the highway following them in his car, she liked that. They were going to Bahrain. Daddy and the other uncles could come with them till the end of King Fahd Causeway and then they had to go back. 

Just when Sneha thought the journey would never end, the bus finally stopped. They couldn’t get off immediately though, they had to wait for their names to be called. One of the uncles was helping the Arab policemen do that. 

“Ishwari Nanduri!” 

Amma pulled Sneha by the arm and led her out. They were stopped by two policemen who peered closely at their faces and their passports. When Sneha realized what they were doing, she became very nervous about making the right face. 

“Okay, you go,” the first Arab said in a thick accent, nodding towards another bus that would take them to Abu Dhabi. As they started to walk, daddy ran up to them. 

“Are you both okay?” 

Amma nodded. “Take care of yourself,” she said. 

“I’ll be back in Jubail in one-two hours. You call me from the Abu Dhabi airport,” said daddy. 

Sneha flung her arms around daddy’s waist. He bent over and planted kisses on both her cheeks. “Be a good girl, Sneha. And take care of amma, okay?” 

“Okay daddy.” 

Once they were inside, Sneha kneeled backward on her seat and propped her elbows on the headrest. She wobbled as the bus started to move, but she kept her eyes on daddy, watching and waving until he was reduced to a tiny fleck on the rear windshield. 