From: sunaina jain <jainsunaina14@gmail.com>
Date: 10 June 2016 at 03:05
Subject: Submission of Short Story for Out of Print
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>

* Bionote* 

Sunaina Jain has done Ph.D. (English) from Panjab University, Chandigarh. Her thesis maps the shifting contours of spirituality of an African-American writer Alice Walker and explores the ways in which her eclectic spirituality interweaves religion, ecology and feminism. She is working as an Asst. Professor (English) at MCM DAV College, Chandigarh. Apart from her passion of teaching, she likes to dip her pen in the colours of fiction and poetry.  Her poems have featured in journals - *The Criterion, Galaxy, Langlit, Dialog, Spark magazine* and *South Asian Ensemble*. Her short stories and book reviews have been published in *Muse India, Indian Ruminations* and on the blog of *Out of Print* magazine. Her poem has got published in an international anthology *Shout It Out* published by Lost Tower publications, London. She plans to come up with her first collection of poems in the near future. 

*The Desperate* 

*Sunaina Jain* 

Like all other days, I keep mumbling and throwing curses at my maid. I am disgruntled with her for no apparent reason. The hinges of the main door need oiling. I despise it the most when my maid enters unannounced producing a creaking sound, most jarring to my ears. I wonder why no maid stays for more than a month. Believe me, these good-for-nothings are parasites! Do I have to live as per their dictates? 

I had just pointed at her repugnant body odour: “Hey, you malodorous one, why don’t you take bath? You stink! Don’t touch my utensils with your slimy hands! You smell of rotten meat!” 

“You waste so much of water as if your sickly husband is going to pay the water bill.” As I said this, my forehead crinkled to register my anger. She walked past me with airs as if she were my mistress. See! What an attitude! How dare she called me a ‘witch’ and ‘pervert’ in retaliation while  she slammed the door! 

“Shama, do you listen or not? Get me today’s newspapers!” I say, as I nonchalantly keep aside my half-done papers under the heavy heart-shaped paper-weight which my ex-husband had brought in the initial days of our marriage. What a waste of time reading all gory news about murders, rapes, merciless killings, political bashings! What’s new? As I fidget with my pencil, I keep aside the main newspaper and start flipping through the pages of a local supplement newspaper. My eyes are drawn towards a heading “Our city no longer safe haven for the senior citizens.” I keep shaking my crossed legs restlessly. Don’t get me wrong…..I am not the fool anymore who would flounder in sentimentality or show concern over social issues. I just happen to look at my today’s time-pass - a random number. May be I am an oddball…..As I revel in the anticipation of good fun, I hear a clatter which pierces through my ears and strike a discordant chord with my favourite Bryan Adams. Oh! The last remnants of my purple-blossomed bone china mug – suddenly the flowers wilted, lying flaccid on the floor, uprooted - as Shama breaks the news to me. 

“You dim-witted girl! You broke my bonechina mug. Who will pay for this loss?” I scream at my new maid, Shama with a cigarette clutched between my index and little finger, the fume unwittingly dispersed in the room. She gapes at me as if I uttered and committed a blasphemy. She murmurs something which I can make out to be an ‘unfelt’ sorry. This time, I have heard the ‘not-to-be-heard’ apology since I am fed up of having to hunt for maids or beseeching my neighbor to send hers for a few days. 

It was a chipped bone china cup, uneven on the edges that made it feel saw-toothed as I supped coffee from it. Nevertheless, I had become accustomed to that cup, it being my faithful companion in woes till early evening. I must have sipped hundreds of cups of sizzling coffee which have permanently scalded my tongue. Yes of course! late evenings are drowned in musings over emotionally-charged pegs of Black Label or Vodka. 

As I peer out of my window, I can see the silhouettes of tall and upright apartments which will pale into oblivion as the sun moves westwards. After breakfast, I slouch against my easy chair near the lobby window as a ritual, trying to draw straight lines which tend to get crooked in case of a hangover. I am working as a freelance architect and home designer since I gave up my job with a private firm. Besides, I do not entertain the idea of interacting with many people anymore. 

My parents disowned me when I had married Joseph Fernandes in a strictly Catholic ceremony. I do not despise them, though disillusioned with the idea of parental love. After paralysis struck my mother, I got to know she was confined to her dark-finished mahagony bed which she had brought with her at the time of marriage. I had gone to meet her once during her illness. The last look in her imploring eyes still seems eternal to me; I could see in those eyes my memories of an irritable yet benevolent mother who had preserved my childhood like old pickle. Her death severed all the remaining ties with my father who took my inter-caste marriage to be a blotch on his family honour. My marriage was on its last legs then, though I never shared my marital crisis with him. How could I when he did not even acknowledge my presence? 

Now and then, I wake up in my sleep from a dream that chases me everywhere whether I sleep on my bed or a *diwan* in my lobby or sometimes on a couch. I don’t think about dad or as a matter of fact anyone anymore….what’s the point? In my lived dream, I see myself standing on the edge of the terrace of a high-rise apartment (Yeah! The same in our neighbourhood) and I keep dreading lest I should fall from this immeasurable height. In the next instant, I am again sitting in my own apartment. There’s always the same gentle tapping at the door. I walk towards the door in tottered steps and as I open the main door, the same familiar face ……only the profile shows up and vanishes in the blink of an eye and I am up…..looking for water….Who this man is I have always wondered? 

Was my marriage jinxed since its inception? It failed, it had to fail. How did the scoundrel think he could get away with his debauchery? To hell with his insincere apologies! Sleeping with that sleazy whore for God-knows how many countless nights and expecting forgiveness………I lost my temper when I caught him in my own bedroom under the cover of white sheets, shamelessly watching porn with that harlot….Huh! 

I am feeling parched now. It is already getting hazy outside. Time for a shot! I take short (or shot) breaks in between to scan newspapers. Often, to break the monotony (let it stay between you and me), I like spying and prying on others; a hobby I developed after my husband’s infidelity. Believe me, it is not a sadistic pleasure…no wonder, many people think so……. 

I just happen to read the news so as to extract some information about an old lady. You know the prank becomes more interesting if it is infused with personal details. 

“An elderly day, Sheila Devi, in her eighties, was in a state of shock after two unknown assailants pounced on her and snatched her gold chain in broad daylight.” 

The article also read: “It has raised questions about the safety and sanity of the old people who live alone. Sheila Devi has been living alone for the last five years devoid of family love, health care and treatment. When asked by the police, the elderly went into a hysterical mode saying the chain was gifted to her by her daughter, Sheena. She seems to be suffering from depression since she withdrew herself from further police enquiry and refused to share anything else. She could barely recall her landline number.” At the end of the news article was the telephone number of the lady in case any relative wanted to reach out to her for assistance or help. 

Hmm…..it might be boring to trick an old cranky lady. Her phone number is just a touch away……A long beep pisses me off. Why the hell old people don’t pick up calls? Do they go deaf? My irritation manifests itself as I clench my fists tightly and thump them on my desk. A second later, I hear a tired, muffled voice on the other end. The words slips out of my mouth……”Sheena, I am Sheena.” I thought she would either be enthusiastic if she took me to be her daughter or cross with me for trying to dupe her if she saw through my trick. Nothing expected happens….. 

“Sheenu, why have you not called me all this while? They robbed me of the chain you had gifted me. You know, your *papa* passed away. He had just slipped in the bathroom.” 

Without waiting for my reply, she started off…… “Sheenu, I miss you. You remember when you were two years old you refused to open your mouth sitting in the same position for a long time. Dad and I tried to bribe you, flatter you, threaten you but you were *You*…. When you sat still for more than half an hour, we became so concerned that we decided to take you to doctor. It was then your *papa* showed you a banana and asked if you wanted it. The minutes of silence were instantly broken as you pounced on banana and hurriedly gobbled it up. You were always a naughty child but we loved you the most! Sheenu, Sheenu, are you there?” 

An uncanny feeling overpowered me as I felt numbness in my limbs. I pressed the switch off icon and kept phone away. Did the lady actually take me to be her daughter? Where is her daughter? I am not concerned about the lady, just a little curious. As it is, these old people lose their minds and start troubling others with their antics. I am not bothered, though she spoiled my sport. I am indebted to my Vodka for keeping me away from useless, rambling thoughts. 

The next morning, I am clear-headed as I shrug off my sleep and see no stars hovering in and over my head. What will be the old lady doing? Will she be getting other calls too? Is my voice similar to that of her daughter? I spend some time lazily in my bed with numerous speculations whirling in my head. Finally, I hitch up my loose pyjama and head off towards the kitchen to make honey-lemon tea. I squirm in my seat looking at tall apartments whitened by the blazing sunrays and my head starts spinning in circles. It is not even a hangover…. 

Thankfully! Shama has come. I shout at Shama to give me a big mug of black coffee with some roasted peanuts to munch on. I miss my spicy Bikaneri bhujia, the empty rustling pack still bedecking my desk. The lonely granite slabs of my kitchen shelf are freed of any burden of filled jars of rice or pulses or jams. Most of the times, I rely on a canteen in our building to serve me *rajmah rice* or *greasy stuffed parathas*. I clasp my phone to call a nearby departmental store to send some *bhujias* to make the hunger pangs of my growling belly subside. 

These touch phones are actually a nuisance, as I accidentally press the last dialed number – a reminder of my failure to amuse myself yesterday. I don’t know what has prodded me as I position my phone against my ear instead of clicking the red icon. My ‘Hello’ is instantly reciprocated with a warm “*Sheenu beta*, *main tenu yaad kardi si!* (I was remembering you!). Come back, we shall keep a maid so that you don’t have to roll chapattis. You remember, we burst into laughter when you said that you would not marry because marriage meant rolling out chapattis.” 

I could sense her voice getting choked as she swayed under an emotional outburst. Has her daughter deserted her just as my parents abandoned me? Is her daughter married? But what have I to do with an unknown lady? I shall disclose the truth without disclosing myself. 

“Helloooo, sorry, I am not your daughter Sheenu…… It was by mistake I called you.” 

A long silence. 

“*Achha! Koi na beta* (Never mind!). You sounded so much like Sheenu..….. but my Sheenu left me forever just as her dad did …I don’t remember….probably a few years ago.” 

Oh! What was this? A number of emotions tossing in my head! 

I pick up phone again……this time, to call my dad. Perhaps, he is the one calling me to him in dreams! Just one try! Right! 