From: <parmindersinghaziz@gmail.com>
Date: 10 June 2016 at 15:49
Subject: Re: Story - Fifty-five
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>

Fifty-Five 

“Is it actually my sweetness that makes you use these epithets for me, or is it you who brims with a lot of love?” “What difference does it make? Isn’t it one and the same thing, or at least, a side of the same coin?” “Still…” “This question makes sense only if you want to be loved by someone else when you leave me.” “Shut up! You know how much I love you.” “Or it may be the fear that I would leave you one day.” “Am I the only one who is showered upon so much of your love?” “So this is the fear.” “Not fear, but I want to hear it from you.” “What if I lie?” “You won’t. I trust you.” “Do you see these tattoos on my body?” “These are too many. Why do you like them so much?” “They are fifty-four. I get a new one inked every fortnight. There is a studio in Delhi.” “You are crazy... how much do you spend on it?” “It costs me nothing. It is a bet that I win each time and the guy inks me free of cost.” “What is the bet about?” “…that I’ll visit him every fortnight.” “What kind of a bet is this?” “It is my kind of a bet.” “You still seem strange to me.” “I know, but this is the way I am. It has just been a few days. You’ll know me well in a few days.” “Why do you keep recording my voice whenever we talk?” “It takes a while to get inked. I shall listen to it while it is being done.” “Why were you asking about that girl yesterday?” “I just asked you if there was any girl around whom you did not like.” “But I saw you talking to her this morning.” “It was something about that boy who inks tattoos on my body.” “What has he to do with the girl I dislike?” “You will know that too.” “Don’t you think it is too early for us? We have met just a few days ago.” “I can turn around if you wish. We have come only halfway.” “You said you had work in Delhi, and you will lose the bet too if you do not reach Delhi in the morning. I am just a little worried. Being alone in a city I have never been to gives me goose bumps.” “I shall leave while you are still asleep. You will scarcely leave the bed before I reach Delhi. And Karnal has a number of malls. You will hardly realize how quickly five hours are gone. I shall pick you around 3 PM. Buy a beautiful pair of jeans for yourself and keep this cash.” “You are so caring. I trust you fully.” “Sleep for a while if you want to. It will take another hour to reach Karnal.” “I shall rather talk to you for an hour.” ….. ….. “This is a beautiful room. Isn’t it?” “I stay in this room whenever I come to Karnal.” “The ambience here is too good.” “Will you like to take a bath? I am going out for a while.” “Yea.” ….. ….. “You took a long time. I have been waiting.” “I was finding something good for you. Do you like this pink one?” “It’s a beautiful nighty. You have an immaculate choice.” “Here’s the menu. Choose something to have and order it on 229. I shall be back after having a quick shower.” ….. ….. “Your skin is flawless. It was lovely to be with you tonight. I shall never forget this evening.” “This is a new feeling. I am ecstatic to have felt you but I also feel as if I lost something.” “It must be virginity. You bled profusely during the first bout.” “I found you recording the sounds while we were between the act.” “I told you what I record this for.” “You are obsessed.” “Your eyes shine. I am sure you are happy. We can have it once more.” “Hmm… You look tired.” “Yea, a bit… It is 1:30. I should get some sleep now.” “I want to sleep in your embrace. Be with me tonight and always.” “Come on.” On 9 Jun 2016 23:40, "ਪਰਮਿੰਦਰ ਸਿੰਘ" <parmindersinghaziz@gmail.com> wrote: 

