From: Harsh Snehanshu <harsh@flatabout.com>
Date: 2 June 2016 at 08:23
Subject: Submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Saree 

It used to be her favourite saree. Father had gifted it to her during their honeymoon, just before they’d boarded the first airplane of their lives. Air India flight number AI 4386 from Patna to New Delhi, July 1986. 

It’s 1996 now. Mother is standing atop the bed, trying to hurl that saree—its color faded, its creases crushed, like their marriage—across the fan hung on the high ceiling of our ancestral house in Patna. The door is bolted. The window that opens to the verandah outside is open. We, five-year-old sister and nine-year-old me, are the witnesses standing in front of the window. Sister is wailing, I screaming. ‘Ma, don’t! Ma, don’t do this, please.’ I don’t remember where father is. He’s in the house though else mother wouldn’t be doing this. He’s the supposed audience. 

Our persistent wails have attracted the attention of the neighbours. They are out in their balconies, idle men in their banyans and gabby aunties with their sarees tucked behind them like dhotis. They crane their necks and babble amongst themselves, careful not to whisper. I see Gyan among them. He regards me highly for having things—Rubik’s cube, Mechano, UNO and carom board—he’d wanted to buy for himself had his parents been richer. For a minute, I am distracted worried what would I tell Gyan when I go to his house to play carom. That father and mother had a fight and mother decided to take her life. Just like that. I won’t go, I decide in between my mindless cries. Not for a week at least. A month if mother actually dies. Not until my shaved head bears some hair. 

Mother has accomplished her mission. Her favourite saree is flung across the fan now. She’s tugging at its two ends to ensure that it would bear her weight, a meager 50 kilos. She ties its two ends with a knot, descends from the bed and grabs hold of a sturdy stool, my makeshift study table, only to place it on the bed. Our cries have become louder. The suicide is imminent. The neighbours are at our gates, amused, with the eagerness of a passerby that stumbles upon an altercation on the road. Just then, I hear father knocking on mother’s door. Loud, vehement banging, the bolt loosening a little with each blow. At first I am glad father is home. An instant later, I am not. Had he not been at home, nothing like this would have happened. We wouldn’t have to hear mother yell: ‘Two motherless kids will make you happy. Celebrate my dead body with your mother.’ 

Father breaks the door. He enters like a hero and takes the stool away from the bed with the finality I never saw in him before. I like his machismo. Mother complains, ‘Chain se marne bhi nahin deta yahan koi.’ Nobody even lets me die in peace here. Our wails stop. Neighbours are disappointed. The ongoing drama has grinded to an abrupt halt. They return scratching their hairy bellies, picking white lint from the navel. Sister rushes to mother’s room, her tiny feet trembling as she runs. No one cries anymore. Is this happiness? How long would this happiness last? Father goes for a walk scrunching his nettled forehead lines. Mother is in kitchen drinking water with sister. I look at the neighbouring balcony. Gyan waves and mimics hitting the carom striker. I ignore and walk to the empty room where mother’s saree is hung, tug its two ends that are tied. It’d make a good swing. I don’t trust the fan though. The bedsheet is rumpled, the four feet of the stool have left pockets of muck on it. It’s eerily quiet in there, as if someone actually took one’s life. Alas, I am too scared of this silence. I wish for Gyan’s carom strikes, of the arresting sound they make at every collision. I go pick the carom board, dust it with the hung saree that, given the assault it faced, will be turned into a wretched wiping cloth. Shoving its side against my armpit, I march towards Gyan’s house, prepared to act all cool. 

Gyan welcomes me with sympathy. His mother is at their bedroom door, behind the curtain. I can see her cracked heels beneath. My mother doesn’t have cracked heels, I remember. 

‘Is everything alright?’ Gyan asks. 

‘Yes. It was just a normal fight. Like your parents would,’ I shrug. The cracked heels retreat. 

‘They don’t,’ he says. Even though Gyan didn’t have a carom board, at that moment I felt envious of him. He also wouldn't ever have a swing in his bedroom. 
