From: Shred Salt <anushred@gmail.com>
Date: 15 June 2016 at 13:08
Subject: Submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

I’m Shreedhar, Ex-Creative Director to the National Geographic in India and the owner of a Brand Consultancy, servicing many multinational corporations across the globe. 

I had been a dreamer and a storyteller since the time I had known myself. Strange as it might sound, being famous for the tidy lies and the so-called excuses to escape situations at school made me feel that I’m a storyteller. 

This is the story of a man by the name of Velu who gets tested by time and pushed to look for God. Will he find him and would his faith in humanity restore? 



*The Story * 

*The Seventh Door* 

It’s been a year since Velu had been sitting next to that foot-over bridge begging for alms. He was not sure what he could do when all his hopes to work started draining after a multitude of failures. Patterns told him that no matter where he knocked, the Goddess of luck was not interested in being with him. Everything failed, one after the other. He lost whatever he had including the only decent shirt that he wore for interviews. 

It was tolerable to stay hungry for a week but beyond that, it was getting too difficult. Velu leaned against the iron pole below the bridge wondering if his life had any meaning. Being a college graduate had no value. The only belongings left in his bag were a pair of jeans, 2 tee shirts, a file full of certificates and an empty tiffin-box. Out of nowhere a one rupee coin fell at his feet and he looked up. He was an old man who gave a smile as he climbed up the stairs of the bridge before dropping the coin. Velu looked at the coin, looked around and saw an old lady with jasmine on her hair sitting on the ground begging for alms. Velu was quick to understand. He realized that the coin might have been for the old woman, accidentally falling near him. When he dropped the coin in her aluminum cup, the lady said a thank you and asked, “why are you giving your alms to me, you can get a few more so that you can go and eat something; I noticed that it’s been days since you’d eaten anything.” 

Today, Velu is known for his matted, unkempt hair and his silence. There are some regulars, students, teachers, clerks and cops who give him enough so that he manages his meals and enough money for a bundle of beedis, a humble luxury. Amma, the jasmine lady who sits next to him was deteriorating by the day and she survived a bit on the remedies and medicines that Velu got for her from the nearest shop. Velu saw a maternal figure in her and he started taking care of her as much as he could. 

Many agents tried to make Velu and Amma a part of their gang, lured them with better spots, minimum guarantee and a roof on top. Velu was never convinced by them and had always stayed away from such people. He was beaten up, kicked around and even told that he would not be allowed to beg under the bridge. They kicked Amma in her face to make sure she and Velu left the place but thankfully one of the local guards drove the goons away. She kept bleeding and it took more than a month for her wounds to heal. Cops played their part too. Velu had to pay fifty rupees every evening, no matter how much he earned and some days if they were not in a good mood, they used to thrash him and take away whatever he earned. It took a while to find a spot next to where Amma sat, where he could hide his money and hence saved himself from losing it all. 

One afternoon, Velu spotted a little object shine in the sun and he was not sure what it was. He got up, took it in his hand and found that it was a small gold earring. He ran with it towards Amma and said, “Look what I found?” Amma looked at it carefully and said that it might have fallen from that little girl who was playing here. Velu and Amma looked around and Amma saw that the family was on the other side of the bridge. Velu jumped onto tracks and Amma screamed, “There is a train coming”. Velu managed to save himself and reached the other side. 

She must have been six and she kept hopping around, a little game that she played while her mother bought her ice cream. Her father was a strong tall man wearing a striped short-sleeved shirt; he was talking to one of the guards. Velu went and told the guard who knew him that he found something that perhaps, belonged to the girl. The father looked at it, held the shirt of Velu and yanked him. He called out for his wife and asked if this belonged to their daughter. The wife took it in her hands and started to scold her daughter for running around. The guard told the man that he knows Velu. The man pulled out a hundred rupee note from his wallet, gave it to Velu and gestured him to go away. The guard asked Velu to leave. 

It’s been weeks and the rains refused to stop. The skies were as dark as charred wood and it roared as loud as it could. Amma couldn’t move even a bit and Velu found it difficult to stay in the water for so long. The bridge was getting flooded and the guard wouldn’t allow them to stay on top as it was against the rules. He tried helping them with some plastic sheets but when you are sitting in water the whole day and that too for weeks, you are bound to fall sick. Velu and the guards managed to drag three huge concrete blocks which was high enough to keep his and Amma’s legs from the water. It got more difficult to move with Amma in this condition. He had asked three of the regulars who gave him alms to help him with a doctor but all he got in return was a sigh of sympathy and a rupee or two more. 

The day had an unusual heaviness to it. Velu narrated Amma a story, a story of a day when he went to meet the love of his life. He knew from her smiles that she may not last the day. He was sure that Amma was not listening; she was drifting away to her freedom. The rains refused to hear any prayers; it had to do what it had to do. It must have been late in the evening as the streetlights came on and most of the regulars went past. 

The voice was soft but audible, Amma whispered, “You see that building behind the big hoarding? I want you to go there. In one of the rooms, you will find God, he will help you. Velu smiled, he gave her the assurance that he would go and he turned his head to see the set of one-room row houses opposite the railway station. The sigh was loud, she didn’t last more than an hour, Velu was left with no one, once again. The guards called the local morgue for a cart and the body was removed in a few hours. He paid for her cremation from what he had hidden behind a circuit board. He bought some jasmine flowers from a local vendor and carefully arranged it on her hair. He watched the cart take her away, his mother, his friend, and his angel. 

Gods of rain came to their senses; people again smiled and discussed bosses, wives, husbands and in-laws. One of the regulars, Mr. Swami came by, gave Velu fifty rupees and asked him to get himself a good meal as it was Swami’s dead son’s birth anniversary. Mr. Swami said that he missed the smile and blessings of Amma and that brought back those moments that Velu shared with her. He looked at the scattered jasmine and remembered her smile. Velu bought a bunch of fresh jasmine every morning to keep where she used to sit. He offered a prayer to the deaf Gods to give her a better life, the next time around. 

Velu took a bath in a public tap with soap after a long time. He wore the oversized shirt, gifted by Mr. Swami. He combed his wet hair with his fingers. The smell of soap was good and he felt that he was presentable. The railway guards smiled when they heard about Velu’s decision to go to the opposite building to meet God. The guard told Velu to take him as well on a Sunday if Velu could indeed meet God that day. The guards went back to sipping their tea and Velu crossed the road and walked towards the building. 

There were seven doors and seven rooms; these were one of those low-income row houses with one room, bathroom and kitchen. Velu knocked on the first door and a little girl of six opened. The smile was so bright that he wondered if she was God. “Who are you?” she asked.  He said, “ I’m Velu and I wanted to meet God.” She smiled and opened the door wide and asked him to come inside. She pointed towards a corner where a small lamp was lit in front of an Idol of Lord Krishna. Velu stood there, he wasn’t sure if he should enter. He kept his first foot in and that is when he heard the angry woman, “Who are you? Why are you coming inside? There is nothing here, get out!” The door shut making a rude noise. 

He said to himself, “so that was not God.” He knocked the second door. A man holding on to his half open lungi opened the door a bit and peeped. “Who are you, what do you want?” Velu saw a woman trying cover herself up in a bedspread through the crack of the door. Velu apologized, “sorry brother, I think I came to the wrong house.” The man abused and slammed the door shut. Velu walked towards the third door and knocked. When no one answered after repreated knocks, the door of the adjacent fourth room opened and a boy came and said that no one lived there because the people who stayed there had left that house. He asked the boy, “Who lives here?” The Boy replied, “me, my father and my sister.” The Boy asked, “Who are you looking for?” With a lot of hesitation, Velu said that he was looking for God. The boy laughed and pointed towards a Banyan tree below the building where a lamp was burning. “He lives there. At least that is what my father tells me.” Velu looked. The boy said with excitement, “Even my mother is with God.” 

No one was opened the fifth door where the name board read, Bhagwan Das. Velu was about to leave when a man in his mid-forties hastily opened the door and asked, “What do you want?” Velu said, “Mmm, I was looking for God.” He asked him to wait and went inside. Velu waited and suddenly he came back with a five rupee coin, stuck it into his palm and asked Velu to leave. 

Velu looked at the last two doors, stood there a bit, thought to himself; there is no God because if there was one, why then would he be the way he was? He turned around and walked towards the exit. Just then he heard the boy, “Did you meet God? Did you see my mother?” Velu stopped mid-way and thought to himself, God could be in the sixth house or even the seventh and he shouldn’t have given up. He looked at the boy and said, “Not yet, I will find him and I will let you know.” The boy smiled and asked Velu to wait. The boy went inside his house, brought a small brass idol of Ganesha and he gave it to Velu and said, “this will help you find what you’re looking for. Appa told me to keep it with me always and said that he will help me find my mother.” He kept the Ganesha in his pocket, thanked the boy and moved towards the sixth door. He knocked and in a bit, a man in his twenties opened the door. Velu could see a group of six to seven people inside, sitting on the floor having liquor. The man asked Velu who he wanted to meet. Velu knew that God could not be in that house and he said, “sorry, I knocked the wrong door.” One of the guys sitting on the floor recognized Velu and said, “hey this is that guy who begs at the railway station, he must have come to steal.” Velu takes a step back and he wanted to leave the place as quickly as possible. The man who opened the door, however, pulled him in and they locked the door. 

They pushed him around, tore his shirt, searched him, and took away the hundred rupee note that was in his pocket and the idol of Ganesha. One of them poured some liquor over his hair and then another started to slap and kick Velu. One of the guys went and called all the people in the apartment block and said that they had caught a thief, showing the brass Ganesha idol as proof.. The boy tried his best to tell his father that he gifted Velu with the Ganesha but all his cries went unheard. His father pulled out a crowbar and hit Velu in his head. The men kicked him harder; they tore off his clothes and tied him to a chair. The boy kept howling, telling his father, “this man was looking for God and I told him that Ganesha will help him find what he was looking for!” 

Meanwhile, inside the seventh door, Dorai Swami pulled out his lathi and his cap. Constable Dorai was getting ready for duty when he heard the commotion, and the man at the door wanted Dorai to join the party and teach Velu, the thielf, a lesson he would remember. Dorai carefully took the jasmines, roses and the marigold that were kept on the table and wrapped it neatly in a piece of banana leaf. It was to be offered to the God who resided in the Banyan tree. 

His head throbbed with pain, the blow was hard and Velu could taste blood in his mouth. He tried to free his hands but he couldn’t as it was tightly tied to the chair. His vision got blurred but he could still see the idol of Ganesha on the side table and the group of men walking around him. He wasn’t sure if he was hearing things properly. The man in front of him slapped him hard and asked, “Why are you here, what were you asking my son? You bloody thief!” Velu was trying to recollect what might have happened. He wasn’t sure of the events as everything around him started to fade away. His eyes were heavier and his body lighter but Velu could feel a fresh smell of jasmine. 

Dorai entered the room, kept the neatly tied bundle of flowers on the stone slab next to the idol of Ganesha and looked at Velu who was bleeding. He waved his lathi in the air, the men moved to the side. The boy’s father said it out loud, “Sir, you should lock him up, he stole this idol from my house,” pointing towards the Ganesha. He walked closer and kept his lathi on Velu’s chin. He lifted the face-up and looked into his eyes. Velu couldn’t see Dorai’s face. Everything was a haze. 

Dorai asked the men to untie Velu. He told the men to disperse and asked the father and his son to come to his house. He told the boy’s father to help Velu till his house. He made Velu sit on a chair while he asked the boy to narrate what happened; the boy promptly explained the whole situation. The father intervened and said that the boy was brainwashed or drugged by Velu to talk like that; he kept arguing that the boy was forced to lie as the beggar thief had done something to make his son lie. Dorai looked at Velu and then towards the man. He asked the man to shut up and take his idol and go home. 

Velu somehow knew that he was inside the seventh door. He could feel the cold water on his face and lips. He tried to open his swollen eyes and he saw the face of Dorai, the constable. Dorai held Velu’s hand and asked, “Do you remember a small gold earring?” 

Velu was moved to a one room apartment that belonged to Dorai’s brother where he got him treated for his wounds and also helped him recover faith in God and humanity. 

Today, Velu works as a security guard in one of those corporate houses in Chennai. 

*Bio* 

I’m Shreedhar, a creative maverick floating in this blizzard called life, allowing my guides, curiosity and foolishness to see the bright and the dark. Analyzing perspectives and joining the obscure earned me the title of being creative. Today I’m a brand and creative consultant shaping identities. 

*SHREEDHAR* G45 Sector 39 Noida Uttar Pradesh India (p)  + 91 120 4158258 (m) + 91 120 9899410123 