From: Jyoti Singh <jyoti@jyotiwrites.com>
Date: 19 June 2016 at 20:35
Subject: Submission: short story
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>

I am a writer based out of Bombay/ Jackson, MS. Some of my work have appeared in magazines like Tehelka, Himal Southasian, Reading Hour, Kindlemag.in, kafila.org, among others. 


*Tomorrow* 

Finally the old man moves out of the way and the Mercedes can pass. 

He is rich in his taste of cars. He had educated himself in which cars were more expensive than others. He waved his banner of *Kaali* at the windscreens, laid it in front of the cars, and hoped they were Hindus. But it worked even on others; in India everybody knows everybody’s god. Fearing communal riot at a red light they all complied. Lately he had seen Hindu gods appear on the walls along the street, at the beach, etc., to deter men from urinating on them. This inspired his logic: if they don’t piss on gods, they won’t run over them. Soon after, he found his banner, hanging desolately in a post festive fete ground strewn with plastic cup and paper plates. They had forgotten the god behind and he claimed her. 

Victorious, he bundles up the *Kaali* under his left-and only-arm and walks with a swagger, fanning himself with a crisp fifty rupee note. A constable who had been watching from a distance- too haggard to bother with an everyday nuisance- catches him after the car goes out of sight. 

“One day you will get run over by some *naastic*”. Why don’t you just beg like the others?” the policeman taps his shoulder with his baton. 

“Rich people hate to be inconvenienced, sir. They won’t kill me.” 

“What’s your name?” 

“Kamaal, sir” 

“You are a Muslim!” 

“They don’t know that!” he winks. “You should see some of the Muslims. They go pale with fright. And turn out far quicker and more generous than Hindu,” he chuckles. 

The policeman pats his back, chuckles along, and then with a poke of his baton in his arse, shoes him away. Kamaal escapes the prod, belying his age. But he isn’t really old. The un-burnt skin peeping from under of his vest gives him away. 

Done with business for the day, he leaves the high-pitched road for the shady alleys that run alongside the train tracks. Relishing a delicious thought, he slips his money somewhere in his crotch. 

... 

Alternating between like he owns the city and as though he is a tourist, he walks purposeless and purposeful. Sun is merciful today; clouds go in and out like they’ve lost their way. The dry air travels down his lungs soothing his throat in cool irony. Soon he spots bottled water in a mound of garbage waiting to be picked up. He drinks. It tastes like metal. He tosses it back where it had been and walks on, some of the lost swagger back on. 

The landscape has changed. The canopy of high rises on the either side and their shadow is now of the same size. It’s time for the first meal of the day. He veers towards a *chai* stall. 

He waves the note at the tea seller, “One cutting!” The *chaiwala* smirks, “How did you manage this?” “What manage motherfucker?” He takes out a creased and tattered, plastic wrapped photo ID from his crotch and shoves it in his face. It is a driver’s license from a time when he looked much younger and had two arms. “You think of me a beggar or what?” “Yeah yeah... then why just *chai*, have some * paav bhaji* also.” “Eat and then shit it out? Not with this!” The tea seller takes the fifty rupee note from him and tells him to step away and wait. The stall is busiest at noon. 

He sits on the pavement at a distance, watching priority customers in slim pants on their smoking break, being served. One of the guys has shabby hair like his. Kamaal gives his twin a full gummy smile. The guy looks away incredulously. Kamaal digs out a *beedi* from a pocket in his grimy, threadbare *kurta*. The * beedi* promptly slips out and into the mini sewage running under him. Tea leaves, milk, sugar, it’s practically *chai*! Yum, he thinks and picks it up laughing. No sign of tea, he runs his tongue over his lips and tastes the city. Somebody’s leg nudges his back. Their clean body gets uncomfortable and he says sorry, merely out of habit. He tucks the *beedi* in the wedge of his ear and waits. 

A boy brings Kamaal his tea, along with his change and a free *vada paav* wrapped in newspaper with some well-oiled green chillies thrown in. He waves at the *chaiwala*, but pockets the * vada paav* as it is. For a hungry man, he is not hungry enough. He relishes the tea with eyes closed to the sun that has been threatening to set for hours. 

... 

He stands on the divider surveying the horizon- cars zipping past competing with one another. As the light turns red, he steps into the standing sea of cars facing homewards. A garbage truck grabs his attention. He spots something hanging out of its hinged crevices. A slipper! He runs towards it. Cars stuck around the truck are rolling up their windows in disgust. It smells like a thousand dead rats, foul enough to kill a thousand more. He pulls out the slipper and slips his foot in it. It fits perfectly and looks barely broken in. What a day! Signal turns green, engine throttles. He quickly sticks his old slipper in the truck, replacing what he took, and bangs on the truck twice. The driver acknowledges Kamaal’s good luck and laughs in the rear view. Pleased Kamaal looks at his feet: sunny yellow and rugged brown. Maybe on his next lucky day he can find a replacement for the other foot. He pulls out his *beedi*. It’s baked. He smells it in satisfaction. He hops, skips, and jumps on the divider as the traffic inches. 

... 

Sitting on the esplanade, he counts his money under a street lamp. Several coins and some notes- a total of 46 rupees. A dog, bored of munching on fried peanuts, closes in. It grunts and sneezes at him. One of the notes almost flies off into the sea, but Kamaal is quick. Furious, he kicks the dog in the belly. The dog yelps and the polite people scowl at him. Some even gasp. But no one dares confront him. His dirty clothes, grey hair and unshaven beard give him a madman aura, someone not to be messed with. He walks off giving another kick to the dog and his money back in the safety of his crotch. 

... 

The mother shoots looks at Kamaal as he marvels at the cheap plastic toy gun and her son trapezes from her hand. It’s a crowded, crammed lane divided between vendors and pedestrians, and an occasional pushy two wheeler. From fresh fish to fresh flowers, the market’s full of things to buy. Judging by the pace of the commuters one would think shopping to be the last thing on their minds, but the vendors were flourishing, enough to afford freebees for the men in khaki. The vendor, irritated by his long presence affecting the clientele: “Boss, it costs money. Don’t waste time,” and lunges to take it back from him, but Kamaal pulls away and his elbow hits something behind him. In the next moment the entire lane drenched in water and shards of glass from what used to be a fish bowl that a man, who now sat atop Kamaal, was moving for his client, was everywhere. In one corner dying fish danced on dead fish; pieces of glass shone through bouquets of flowers they’d slashed; wet garments of various sizes had dust stains appear on them. The permanent temporary residents of the lane closed in on him. Pedestrians had already diverted themselves. It didn’t take much to know that bashing him up was the only compensation to be had, so the settlers began. 

Moments later, a policeman showed up, sniffing the ruckus. He pulled the men and women, all limbs engaged in thrashing Kamaal, away. He pointed out blood to the irate crowd. As if satisfied by the sight of blood, they stopped. All the mud and gunk he had rolled in had only deepened his browns by a few shades. Kamaal, shielded by the policeman, spat forcefully in anger. Livid crowd groaned. The policeman slapped him to rein him in. Kamaal spotted his banner under someone’s feet. The Kaali was visible. People began touching it and mouthing apologetic mantras and a few even planted a couple on him for not taking proper care of it. When the policeman gleaned that Kamaal only had one hand, he promptly used it to shame the crowd. Kamaal’s expressions changed as though his missing limb was a revelation to him too. They all toned down and went back to salvage their spoilt merchandise except the labourer who was on the phone pleading with his client. To placate the labourer, the policeman promised he’d lock up Kamaal for two days. Kamaal grabbed the policeman’s legs. The policeman reasoned what could a man looking like him possess? At this Kamaal promptly clutched his crotch. The labourer pointed it out. The policeman unclamps Kamaal’s hands, amazed at his stubbornness. He finds the 46 rupees in his pyjama and gives it to the labourer. Everybody knew it wasn’t enough to cover for half a fish, but enough for a pound of flesh. The mother and son passed them by carrying the toy gun. Kamaal’s fight gave in. Policeman pulled Kamaal by his *kurta* and dragged him out of there. Two rights and one left, and they were out on the main road. The policeman gave him a tight slap. Better things to do with his time than locking up invalids, the policemen walked off, telling him to lie low for a week. Kamaal stood still, looking through his muggy eyes at the world of lights and sounds. 

Suddenly his sides twitch. He holds his stomach and with a certain familiarity plops himself on the ground. He pulls out of his pocket a soggy mash of bread and potatoes and newspaper, all deeply inked in. He throws the green chilly at the pigeons nearby. As one of them shudders, he almost chokes on his laugh. He moves his head tortoise-like, as the food travels in his body, and watches the blood on his elbow thicken. 

... 

A row of tarpaulin homes dwell on a pavement in a ubiquitous, god-forsaken part of the city- he watches men, women and children going about their open air lives. Kamaal is home, but he doesn’t own one. He reorients himself and puts on his one-arm swag. A boy of not more than seven runs to him and hangs by his neck, “Kamaal Chacha!” Kamaal looks at him apologetically and runs the back of his palm over his face, but the boy leaves him, and with a leftover enthusiasm joins his friends in devouring a flat tyre. 

It’s quiet on the pavement, and on the street. Only dogs are up, scrounging through garbage. The air is salty and cool. While the families are asleep in their plastic cocoons, Kamaal is lying awake, farther from the dwellings, but looking at them, alone. As he turns away, on his side, his shoulder hurts. Finally the ache has set in. An involuntary tear travels to his nose and soaks into the ground. Just then he feels a presence behind him. He doesn’t turn; he knows. He unrolls the banner from under his head and spreads it over them. The boy slips his hand in Kamaal’s pyjama and searches for him. Wrapped warmly in a child and a god, he thanks through his wounds for the tender mercies. He shuts his eyes and smiles at tomorrow. 

Jyoti Singh 

*www.jyotiwrites.com <http://www.jyotiwrites.com>* 