From: koundinya ayyagari <koundinya1990@gmail.com>
Date: 17 June 2016 at 01:45
Subject: submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

*Biographical Sketch: * 

Koundinya Ayyagari is from Visakhapatnam. He longs to write full-time. He draws inspiration from the sound and the spume of predawn tides racing toward shore in the Bay of Bengal. 

*Story:* 

*Title: *Crevices of Mind 

‘Fish, plants, animals, people, anyone, when they die, if we truly love them, they become stars.’ Her father told her when her goldfish died. Of all the stars she could see from her window, she wondered which one her father might be. 

She realized it was just a bad dream; if at all the realization was any consolation to her. Fire! Everything around was on fire. Everyone was screaming. Bedroom door wouldn’t open. From the window she watched the entire garden turning to ash. There he was, below the half-grown mango tree they planted together, his leg stuck under a log of wood. He was yelling her name. She read his lips but couldn’t hear him. Window-glass wouldn’t break. Helplessness! Utter helplessness! Somewhere, a transformer exploded. The electric-pole spit fierce sparks and began to tilt. There was no escape. It fell on him, and she woke up. 

The curtains were wide open. Blazing rays of May filled the room. She stared at the mango tree for almost a minute until the cacophony of neighbor’s car-reversing dragged her view to the street. Aprajita aunty was sending her kid to school. Anirbaan was cleaning his bike. Few cars honked at an auto-rickshaw that blocked the road. A motorcycle zigzagged its way through the cars and the auto. Everything around seemed to her so repulsively mechanical, so ruthlessly robotic, as if the whole world  is an ugly wall-clock with countless disgusting hands circling round and round with no trace of emotion. 

She plugged in her ear phones and played the audio-message. ‘MAYA!’ it began, her father’s voice was loud and brimmed with enthusiasm. The volume was so high it hurt her ears. 

‘Happy birthday!, little girl. Paris is beautiful. I wish you are with me. We could have celebrated on the top of Eifel tower. We will all come here later for sure.  I miss you SO SO SO MUCH! Love You!’ 

She played it in loop for an hour. 

Power went off and the fan came to a stop. She unplugged her ears and threw earphones aside. A sharp stinging pain stemmed from below her temple, shot up her forehead, and ceased in seconds like a blinding flash of lightening. She fell back; her head hit the pillow hard. There were three circles in the middle of the fan to which she never paid any attention. Suddenly, she saw, thought, and found something that was hidden from her all this while. Three they were, may be the omens warning her about her father’s death right from the start, three witches foretelling her dark future. This sense lingered for a while. Dizzy and dehydrated, she looked for her water-bottle. It wasn’t there. Her eyes went to the mango-tree again. 

Few voices came from hall. A bangle clinked on the door-knob. Lokhi entered cautiously, with sandwich, pushing the door open just enough to squeeze in, and closed it behind her. 

‘I am not hungry.’ Maya said, turning to the window. She wore the sweatshirt her father bought. 

Lokhi hesitated for a second, gathered courage, and paced across the room. 

‘Look how thin you became! What will happen to your poor stomach if you torture it like this?’ She reached the other side of the bed. 

She closed the curtains, picked the plate up and reached Maya. ‘It’s so hot you’ll suffer a heat-stroke Maya beti. And why are wearing this cap-sweater?’ she said, removing the hood over Maya’s head. 

‘Open them.’ Maya said, pulling back the hood and pointing her finger to the curtain, her eyes fixed in the same direction, the sight of mango tree then blocked by the purple curtain. 

Lokhi stared at Maya for a moment still holding the plate in her hands. Though barely one-fourth her age, Maya always bossed over Lokhi, darting commands born out of arrogant whims, for all of which Lokhi was always a happy slave. But since few days, though reluctant to admit, she grew scared of her. 

‘Yes, it is hard for Maya,’ she told herself, ‘but it’s almost a month now and Maya should at least attempt to resume her normal life. Chitra is too young to understand any of this, she would do fine. But who would stand by Anurima? Her eyes don’t sparkle anymore; all those tears washed away the twinkles of her orbs and left them as round moulds of dying embers. She may not wear the white of widowhood, but its weight, she must endure forever. And yesterday’s incident might have been such insufferable agony to her. How can Maya shun her mother? Oh! Such hard blow on an already beaten soul, an excruciating wrench from well within, from a mouth that is meant to soothe, from a force that is born to support, an assault from once a part of her, now separate. How painful it must have been!’ 

Lokhi felt an urge to better the situation. How could she be afraid of a girl whom she nursed for eight years? Yes, she may shout, she may throw the plate away; still, she was her little-boss after all! 

She sat beside Maya and began ‘Maya beti, if you are like this all the time, who will take care of…’ 

‘Open them.’ Maya repeated, peering right into Lokhi’s eyes, in a tone that Lokhi never heard before. 

Not a shout. No howling, no throwing, nothing what Lokhi was expecting, but that queer flame in those eyes, that stare, those words, they were not from the Maya she knew. They were nowhere from the conceit that her pampering nourished all these years. Nor were they the arrogance of a fourteen-year-old. From what hideous hell-fires that burnt in which crevices of her mind came these expressions, she couldn’t comprehend. They were dreadfully cold, coldness that froze her soul, and filled the room with disturbing apathy that suffocated her. It was as if her whole existence was sucked into an unfathomable and inconceivably dark abyss. She opened the curtains and tiptoed out of the room. She was scared. 

Another week passed in scarier silence. Maya refused to step out of her room. Anurima was not allowed; her mere presence worsened the situation. Lokhi never spoke. She entered timidly, took in food and water and removed them. Four times a day, plates and cups went in and out of Maya’s room. Maya barely ate. A small bite from the corner of a sandwich, an inch down in the level of Bournvita, and patterns in the plate, sometimes drawn with the spoon in Poha, sometimes in an arrangement of Rajma beans, none of which Lokhi understood. Is she trying to convey something? Is she testing me? Am I giving up on Maya too soon? Am I frightened of my little-boss? Innumerable questions, one rising from another, one leading to another, formed dense webs in her head that clouded her judgment. They reduced her to a silent spectator gazing intently into Maya’s pool of stagnant sentiments wondering, worrying, and trembling to arrive at an estimate of its depth. 

Two days later, in the morning, Lokhi heard Anurima call for her. She was in Maya’s room, replacing the water-bottle. Maya was awake. She sat with her back resting against the slant of her bed, blinking, and looking at her feet. Lokhi rushed out and pulled the door as she went. The door came to a halt just before the close. A thin line was left open and Maya could see the edge of sofa, and only the palm tree from family photo in the hall they took at a public garden in Kolkata. 

She heard quick tinkling and thumping, and the door was pushed a little. From the slightly widened gap, Chitra put her head in and tried to look into Maya’s room, her head half-way below the door-knob. Clad in pink t-shit and diaper, with head the size of a fist, two marble like eyes, curly hair, bulgy cheeks, tiny hands with golden bangles having hardly the diameter of a coin, and silver anklets with minute shells hanging from their lengths, Chitra surveyed Maya’s room. Maya sat straight, removed the blanket, and tossed it aside. Her attention captured by this in an otherwise static room, Chitra looked up. For a second, she was expressionless. A moment later, she smiled, a smile so supremely gay, as if its source was a perennial river fed by glaciers of pristine love that flowed in her veins making pulsations in her little heart that traveled all the way to her face, lit up her eyes, flushed her cheeks, and produced a sound that can only be felt. 

For the first time in two months Maya smiled. She didn’t understand why, but it was unstoppable. In Chitra’s innocent face, she felt her father, the warmth of his hug, his hand on her shoulder, her cheeks pinched by his soft fingers, the comfort in his lap. Distant memories of him, swooped down like gliding gulls, were so close to her one instant and flew far in the next, away and high into the empty sky of her life, towards the horizon where her joy and her sorrow seemed to have met. 

She extended her arms and made a gesture. Chitra went forward, in a succession of precarious steps, barely balancing herself, and reached Maya’s bed. Maya picked Chitra up, gently placed her on the bed, and lied down beside her. Chitra mumbled for some time, oscillating her glance between the tube-light to her left to Maya’s face to her right. Maya slid her hand under the pillow, brought out from the other side, and placed it on Chitra’s shoulder. Both stared at the ceiling. 

‘Do you know what those three circles on the fan mean, Chitra?’ she said looking at them. 

Chitra’s hand moved and tried to feel her lips. She kissed Chitra’s fingers and held them. 

A tear fell out of her eye as she continued, ‘That small circle on the top… that is you, and the next one… that is me. Then there is the third one, that’s her… and that is all, you see! There is no fourth. There should be a fourth, no? There should be. I searched for it, you know, really did. But there isn’t a fourth. It was telling us Chitra, it was telling us right from the day we came to this house. It was telling us it is going to take him away. I didn’t listen. It was all… my fault. I never listened.’ Tears ran down her cheeks. ‘If only I listened I would have stopped him from going. And it only whispers, this fan, can you hear it? You can’t, right? You can’t. It only whispers.’ She shut her eyes hard. ‘It was my fault.’ With this, she began weeping, and in her pangs of regret, pressed Chitra’s fingers hard. Chitra wailed in pain. 

Anurima came running, and before Maya realized what happened, she entered Maya’s room. Maya stood erect on her knees and howled ‘GET OUT. GET OUT OF MY ROOM!’ Anurima took Chitra and ran out of Maya’s room. She was more afraid than angry. Maya slammed the door behind her and Chitra’s cries grew even louder. Anurima rushed into her bedroom, closed the door, and began to soothe Chitra, swaying her left and right, up and down, until by degrees she grew calm. Anurima took Chitra on her shoulder, and the baby slipped into slumber in the slow rocking of her mother’s body. Tears from Arunima’s suppressed crying fell on the pink t-shirt. Lokhi entered the room silently with milk. Anurima made a sign and Lokhi placed the bottle on the table and left. 

After this, the house became even calmer. For first few days of the following week, Anurima rarely spoke. A slight fever brought her down for a day and left her with a headache. Lokhi sympathies found new crucibles to fill. She grew more cautious about Chitra, never letting her out of sight, increased the number of lemonades served to Anurima, and juiced oranges for Maya. Looking at Maya, Chitra, and Anurima, she felt that she shared a part of blame for whatever is happening, maybe she grew lazy in her services to God, became oblivious of the Almighty in the comforts bestowed by her masters. She began cleaning the idols twice a day, replaced withered flowers with fresh ones from the garden in the evenings along with mornings, and chanted verses that work to improve health. For an entire month she never broke her routine, and her prayers bore few fruits. Maya’s eating improved, though marginally. Anurima was back to her normal self. Chitra was obedient and seldom cried. Lokhi increased the frequency of her prayers. 

On a Thursday morning Lokhi made kheer, offered it to her idols and took some to Maya’s room. She opened the door and saw Maya. Petrified, her eyes grew larger. She dropped the bowl. Kheer spill all over the floor and the bowl made loud sounds upon every tumble. Anurima came running and stopped right behind Lokhi. Both stood for a moment and looked. Tiny streams of thick blood took meandering paths around Maya’s left arm and dripped on the sheets. Kitchen knife was lying on the floor. She was on the bed, her eyes closed, and with no sign of movement. They rushed to her. Lokhi held her finger below Maya’s nose and confirmed she was breathing. Anurima took Maya’s arm and turned it towards her to locate the cut. She saw on Maya’s hand, three letters carved out clearly, across half the breadth of the hand with much space in between - ‘D  A  D’. 

Local physician was called. 

‘Not much blood was lost, no danger. But she is very weak. Take good care of her. And… nothing to worry, but do consult Mrs. Banarjee’ He said, handing over two sheets of paper. 

The prescription with few scribbles was a relief, but the pale-blue letterhead with a reference to psychiatrist came as an incomprehensible shock to Anurima. Since three months every day was a stone she somehow managed to swallow. Written in thick, blurry blue, the word ‘depression’ felt familiar and strange at the same time. She stood still, unable to understand what she was going through, struck by thousand different fears that after cancelling each other left an unsettling aftertaste. 

For the next two days, Anurima was by Maya’s side all the time. Chitra became Lokhi’s duty. Maya was too weak to protest, she slept like a baby under her mother’s doleful eyes. She reminded Anurima of her first pregnancy, how she pushed Maya into this world, how delicate and tiny her baby was, how her heart beat when Maya blinked for the first time, and how she gently poked the little nose with her finger. A teary layer appeared in her eyes.  She felt Lokhi’s hand on her shoulder. Mrs. Banarjee would be visiting in the morning, the day after. It was almost midnight. She lied down beside Maya, sideward, one hand on the pillow and another on Maya stomach, and gazed into her daughter’s face for few minutes before sleep consumed her. 

When Anurima woke up, Maya was looking at her, sitting at the edge of the bed. Anurima got up, tied her hair in a bun, and smiled at Maya. There was no response. She turned to the wall in front and in a voice neither harsh nor soft, said ‘Go out.’ 

‘Maya, are you alright, I am so glad you recovered.’ 

‘Go out.’ 

‘Maya, I am scared, don’t be like this.’ 

‘Go out.’ 

‘Maya, please, talk to me.’ 

‘Go out.’ 

One cataleptic step after another, Anurima walked out of the room. Sitting on her bed, for hours she tried decoding Maya’s behavior. There was something that kept Maya away from her that she couldn’t grasp. Maya witnessed some heated arguments she had with Abhishek but they weren’t serious. Did Maya sense that she didn’t love Abhishek? But what is love anyway? All the notions of love she had were proved to be either wrong or fantastical after marriage. She was his wife and she lived in that capacity. Did Abhishek tell something to Maya? Abhishek wouldn’t share his troubles with anyone; impossible that he would talk about her to his own daughter. Was it because her job made her neglect Maya? Did she neglect Maya? She asked herself many more questions, and at the end of each she felt a twinge of vague guilt. She lost Abhishek, and whether there was love or not, she lost her husband. She decided that she can’t lose her daughter too. 

‘But how can I help her if I cannot talk to her!’ That night Anurima decided to speak, as a mother to a daughter. 

She went to Maya’s room and opened the door. 

‘No.’ Maya said. She wore the same sweatshirt, with the hood over her head. 

Anurima fell on her knees at the door. ‘Today, I am talking to you,’ holding the door-knob, she continued ‘if you want to stop me, come push me away and close your door. Much is to be cleared Maya. It feels like I lost half of you already, and I am sorry I didn’t do this earlier. But no more! Lot had happened already that I can’t change. I can’t lose you Maya, no, not you too.’ She paused. 

An indication of some kind of apology in Anurima’s face bound Maya to her place. 

‘Maya, I was 26 when Abhishek and his family came to see me. I was a young woman with a plan for myself. I wanted to be a professional singer. My dad told them that I sing. I sang for them and they loved it. I was told that I can continue my music after marriage. We got married. After that I sang at many family parties, birthdays, marriages, house-warming ceremonies, until I felt sick of such singing. Six months later I sought Abhishek’s permission to go to a Music school in Dehra Dun where I was accepted. Abhishek didn’t say no, but he didn’t say yes either. Few days later, Abhishek’s mother fell ill. It was serious. It felt cruel to trouble Abhishek during that time. After four months of struggle, she passed away. I waited for another opportunity which never came. Then you were born.  My whole world changed. I loved you more than music, I still do, my priorities changed. But whenever I found time, I practiced. My lost carrier in music eventually became a facet of painful humiliation for me, and a joke for Abhishek. He thought it was funny. I told him it’s not. We had many arguments over it. He never apologized. This might seem silly, but music was as dear to me as my life, and I sacrificed it. He never considered it serious, just like my dad. I hated him for that. In time we grew apart, we spoke but hardly communicated. In few years the conflict crawled very far from resolution. We both were in a strange way separated, we behaved like other couples, but we didn’t believe, maybe it was only me, I don’t know. After Chitra came, I began to neglect him even more.’ 

‘I miss you SO SO SO MUCH! Love…’ mobile in Maya’s pocket ran out of battery. Maya heard only the last sentence. 

Anurima continued, ‘I may not have loved him like I should, but together we built a happy home. Now that he is no more, I cry and repent every day. But I had to let it go Maya, for the sake of you, for the sake of Chitra, for the sake of us. And if you too leave me, what would become of us? I don’t know what is going on in that little head of yours, but Maya, I love you, I always did.’ 

‘Who is Bipin?’ asked Maya. 

Anurima was stunned. She had no idea how Maya knew Bipin or why he came up in this conversation. 

‘Did you love him too?’ 

‘Bipin… Bipin is my friend Maya, very old friend from college days.’ 

‘A friend to visit in the night after fighting with your husband?’ 

‘What…’ 

‘You thought I was sleeping, didn’t you? I was awake that night. You woke me. Dad asked you to lower your voice. You didn’t bother. You were shouting. You left him. He sat in the garden, on the 

grass, crying. He drank that night, did you know? He was talking to himself like a mad man, and I heard him.’ Maya started crying. 

‘I saw his tears. How can you do that to him? He wished you happiness wherever you went. How pathetic he was.’ She paused. 

‘Tell me… Am I my father’s daughter?’ 

Anurima stood up; her hands covered her nose and mouth. She turned dead white. Tears streamed down her face. She fell two steps back as if pushed from front. 

‘You killed him! Stop acting! Go be happy! Get lost.’ Maya yelled. 

Anurima ran to her bedroom, fell on her bed and sobbed. Maya slammed the door. Lokhi went and sat beside. Anurima buried her face in Lokhi’s lap and broke into uncontrollable sobs. Lokhi tried soothing her. After almost an hour, Anurima slept. Lokhi slept on the floor next to Anurima’s bed. 

Lokhi and Anurima woke up to the sound of calling bell. Lokhi announced the arrival of Mrs. Banarjee. Anurima washed her face and went to hall and Lokhi brought coffee. 

‘Can I meet your daughter? Is she usually up by this time?’ she asked, smiling. 

Lokhi knocked Maya’s door. There was no answer. She tried to open but the door was locked. 

‘It’s ok, these days children sleep till 11 in the mornings. And holidays, of course!’ Mrs. Banarjee added. 

‘Maya is usually up by 7:30.’ Anurima said, and walked to the door. 

‘Maya...’ she called. 

There was no answer. Lokhi grew scared already. She went to the garden to look through the window. The curtains were closed.  She returned and saw Anurima still at the door. She dashed to the garden, took a huge stone, broke the window glass, and drew the curtains aside. A loud scream followed by louder cries came out of Lokhi as she hurried to the kitchen through the hall. She brought the iron crowbar and with three strong blows broke the door open. 

Maya’s body hung from the fan, the blanket serving as noose. The bed was lifted and inclined to the wall. There was blood all over the floor. Anurima fainted. Mrs. Banarjee attended to her while Lokhi brought the body down. Anurima regained her senses, fell on Maya, and kissed her everywhere. She hit her forehead hard with her palm each time she repeated ‘I should have called you the same day.’ 

When Lokhi, still in shock, went into Maya’s room, she saw in the middle of the fan, a piece of cloth, cut in a large circle, painted in blood, pasted alongside three other circles. 