From: Rochelle Potkar <rochellepotkar@gmail.com>
Date: 15 July 2016 at 16:39
Subject: Submission
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>
​​
Bio: 

Rochelle Potkar’s 'The Arithmetic of breasts and other stories' was shortlisted for The Digital Book of the Year Award 2014, by Publishing Next.  ‘Four Degrees of Separation’ is her book of poetry.  She blogs at: www.rochellepotkar.com 

*Symbols of a life * (3600 words) 

Rochelle Potkar 

*I.                    **Silhouettes *(/for apparitions) 

*“No, No*!!” Mrs. Smita Arora awoke in the darkness that bounced off her house. She kneaded the lump in her throat. The same insect-shadow stood at the corners of her eyes: black, claw-mouthed with a teasing tip of venom. She could feel its scorpion shape move on the floor. Click tick. Click tick. 

clock ticking, insect clicking… 

…insect clicking, clock ticking... 

It had followed her through her life. Every word to describe its phantom-ness had failed. Tonight too, it circled her and stopped right behind her, looming large on the wall. 

She waited. It waited. 

Until the crashing ring of the telephone. *Who would call at 3 a.m.?* 

She dragged herself to the drawing room and slumped into an easy chair taking in the voice of the messenger. The practiced voice spoke of death tolls, unfortunate accidents, condolences, and a plane crash. *This was it then.* Smita’s chest thumped, her eyes hurt, her face crumpled. *GONE??? Her son, Sanju, his wife, young Sameer and younger Priyanka?* 

*THEY are -- were -- NEVER coming back???* 

II.                  *Ants  *(/for impermanence) 

Ants rose from Smita’s feet to her spine. They clutched the flesh on her arms, thighs, marching all the way back to the epicentre of her knees. They spread over scalp, gripping it with tight pincers. These ants that had killed the scorpion in tasteless determination sucking out its carcass now knocked on her doors to teach her a lesson in transience -- of fear, of life itself. 

She fell over the creak of her bed, sleeping until noon where she dreamt of water-logged planes and bloated bodies, floating bags and waiting crocodiles, silt, spells, history, treasure chests, ripped burnt clothing, expressions in ballooned faces, hope in open dead eyes. 

When she woke up, they were gone - the scorpion and the ants. Day spilt over every corner, touching and lighting the floor. 

*‘Wait for the bodies to come,’ the voice over the phone had said.* 

If she had left the house as planned, she would have missed this. But she had decided to imbibe in some lonesomeness before going for good from her son’s house, and now she had it: *Their plane had crashed into the cold, dark depths of the Indian Ocean. * 

The house would stay empty now. Their bags would return sea-beaten, and *they* in bits and parts making her receiving hands tremble. What waited for her was a circus. She would have to make funeral arrangements but first their passport photos would flash over the TV. ‘Victims! Victims! Victims! 396! who went into water graves’, the quintessential voices of the reporters would say. 

Neighbours, acquaintances, friends, the son’s colleagues, his wife’s friends would come - all of whom she didn’t know, remember or recognize. They would come to brand her with their interpretations of sadness, her sadness in particular. Lone loser, poor surviving old woman, sediment of a tragedy. She would carry the weight of their perceptions, pity and sympathy. 

Her lips welded in tears, snot, spit. Her throat parched into a silent scream. 

III.               *Burning giraffe*  (/for apocalypse) 

There was still a full moon in the 5 a.m. pre-dawn sky. The waters that the plane had been heading to were no ordinary waters. It had been a battleground just ten days ago between the fishermen who were high-sea trolls of a small island in the Indian Ocean, and international fishing trawlers. 

The victory was huge for Harry Ramkissoon, President of the fisherman’s union and his village friends. Tying up with environmentalists they had managed to stop the trawlers from invading into their zone thus clearing them off their water space and minimizing its exploitation through over-fishing. 

This had been the first week after the battle was won, to operate fishing vessels on patches of water that Ramkissoon’s village had plumbed into for years for tuna, small fish, big fish, marlin, octopus and lobsters before organized encroachers of large conglomerates had taken over. 

Harry watched the titanium sky. The sun was yet to shoot out above the catchment of curdled clouds at a 45-degree angle from his boat. The boat’s engines hummed a grim drone, always and easily intoxicating to his ears. The waters, as far as he could see, belonged back to them though water like air did not have divisible marks. Only those in regular touch with them knew where to draw the lines. 

It was freedom from the big people, big vessels, big nets, big catch of up to even 200 tonnes per day from where his catch and share would go missing. 

Already the salt of the sea was into his skin, mingling with the sweat of his body. He would fish in peace today. Because of the aquaculture done by the earlier trawlers, he suspected there would be fatter fish down there to catch – if, at all, a compensation for his grief. 

That’s when he heard the sound. He looked behind. High up from the other side of the light grey sky a star was falling, not a shooting star …and was moving fast in its trajectory to the territory marked for his village. 

The star glinted silver as the first ray of sun struck and revealed a blot of gold – fire! Within minutes it had grown into something large, mechanical, its insides exposed, its sides torn, a part of its tail hanging. He sensed a painful searing in his stomach seeing the moon in the dark mirror of the ocean disappear as the tattered star hit the waters so largely that it confounded everything. He thought he heard a faint muffle of human sound. 

*IV.              ** The Elephant *(/for a difficult balance) 

Just the other day Smita had packed her tid-bit belongings, planning to stop by a friend Surajnath’s home, who had contacts with an ashram. 

Just a week ago the daughter-in-law, swinging her *pallu* over the tautness of her breasts, had spat out final words to Smita’s over-heating auditory system. 

She would miss them now: the cuss-word-spitting-daughter-in-law, the remote-controlled grandchildren whose TV volume filled their room like over-spilling tea. 

She, their babysitter when needed, a nuisance when not. 

In bitter moments she had wished her son’s family dead. In deep wrath hoped something heinous for the daughter-in-law, mortal sickness and failure in exams for her arrogant grandchildren. For her son to once see what a snake his wife was. Now they were all gone in the fruition of her worse curse. *Whom could she blame?* 

She, the moving presence in her son’s life that he walked back and forth against, strengthening his marital bond while overlooking his maternal one. 

She walked against her own shadow. The crash had redefined her, when the walking out of her son’s home should have. Instead of respect she would get pity now. 

She would also have to face their absences alone. There would be no fight or negotiation, brief promise or betrayal. No offense heard directly or eavesdropped over whispering telephones. She would not be the victim. She was the real victim. Everything distanced itself - meaning, predictability… 

The TV played in the background, over and over, about plane half-spins and frozen birds blooming with fire and smoke, spurting like popcorn into deep sea. 

Debris had spread 50 square miles over 20000 feet beneath ocean surface. The few bodies found were being identified by DNA and fingerprint. ‘Did the plane’s fuel leak first or was it pilot error?’ the TV asked. Political debate, case studies, man-machine failure histories, conspiracy theories… it presented everything. 

Ambitious people could view the same thing in endless ways when the loss wasn’t deeply theirs. On the fifth day, a TV reporter threatened they would visit the victims’ kin’s homes to interview them, talk about compensation, and Smita triggered the screen into silence. 

*V.                 **Drawers and knobs *(/for passion and complexes) 

There were three men who formed a triangulate of decision-making for Air Madhya Bharat Flight 008, Boeing 747-400 on that day: air traffic controller Kannan P. Krishnan and the pilots *Captain* and *Junior*. 

Krishnan had been an ATC for 16 years. On that day too he was handling 25 to 30 flights coming and going through five air routes. He made recurring updates of altitude, direction, airspeed, and freeway numbers for each of these flights. Handling 25 to 30 blinking dots on a screen might have looked easy to an onlooker but each moving dot stomached 500 people. Nearly 12500 to 15000 lives could be in his charge obtuse-angled somewhere between earth and sky, each day. Krishnan’s job required calmness, super alertness, perfect diction, language and communication skills. He also had to be physically fit with no dependence on drugs or other medication. 

The pilots Captain and Junior differed in terms of age and flying experience. Captain had 20000 hours while Junior, 3000 hours and the plane a total of 6000 flying hours behind it. 

Though of fine airmanship, Captain had been disgruntled with the industry to which he had given the best years of his life. Its goals of timeliness were good for the customer or the aviation business but it only added flights to his schedule. 

The good old days of relaxed working were gone. 

Now he struggled with stress, escaping it only by dreaming of a holiday resort to be opened soon upon his retirement. There he would put his feet up and watch the sun set as the resort would make money for itself. *Just five more years to go*... Retiring early would earn him sniggers from his peers and crew. It would feel like failure. Moreover his son-in-law was still climbing the high echelons of the government; the land for the resort by the sea would come to him for almost no cost in another five years. Captain took nip sips of his 30-year old Highland Park single malt whisky thinking about this. It helped him hide his various displeasures behind a sombre face. He set out from his transit hotel for flight. 

In the intangible drawers of being, Captain stored years and years of parental pride derived from his many children’s stellar achievements in business and industry. In yet another invisible pocket of existence, he stowed indulgences of all things fine and expensive: cigars, alcohol, and transient beautiful women. In another abstract compartment, he stored disdain for people he didn’t consider *uber*, which was almost everyone. 

This day too, he bullied himself out of a breath test with cockiness and didn’t greet Junior but smiled at him with derision. Captain could hide his scorn in a secret box behind his smirk. 

The season was one of rains and the report in Captain’s hands forewarned of a tropical revolving storm right along their planned flight route. Before the flight could take off Junior said, “Captain, we should deviate and go around this.” 

“Uh huh, that will only make it longer. Don’t you think of time, money, fuel?” Captain turned to his controlling space in the cockpit cutting out further discussion. 

The take off of the plane was fine. But when they climbed to 40000 feet above sea level, 80 miles away from the airport, ATC K.P. Krishnan’s voice radioed, “Air Madhya Bharat Flight 008 you might be entering into bad weather.” 

Five minutes later, they were hit by a blinding stroke of lightning. The aircraft’s electrical circuits got burnt leading to a total electrical failure with all the inertial navigation systems (INS) disrupting. Captain and Junior were suddenly in the dark about position, orientation and velocity. 

Junior troubleshot for the failure, shifty and panicky with a feeling of dissociation from the panel of knobs in front of him; his previous flights had all been good ones. He turned on many knobs, in the process, disengaging the auto-pilot. 

The plane began a gradual descent. 

“We are going down! … a graveyard spiral! Left rudder… Left rudder!!” shouted Junior. They now only had standby pressure instruments to guide them. 

“Captain, look at your instruments!” he shouted referring to the VSI instruments that gauged air flow and pressure. 

*HE! was going to teach him HOW-TO-FLY! HE!? * “We’re doing fine. It’s a straight path.” replied Captain calmly. 

K.P. Krishnan’s voice radioed, “Air Madhya Bharat Flight 008, you have descended by 10000 feet. Your altitude is way below your assigned level at 400. You are a danger to other traffic around.” 

K.P. Krishnan again, “Climb and maintain your flight at level 350.” 

“Right the plane!” shouted Junior. 

In one corner of his mind, Captain had a quick switch for temper. In another, an instant rationale for ceasefire-quiet. He used it now looking at the way his first officer was behaving. *Young fellas thought they knew everything.* 

“Left. Left. Left. Left. Left. Left. Left,” said Junior. 

Relying on his own judgment, Captain applied the right rudder and began a fast and simultaneous turn and climb. That day, not only the INS systems of the plane failed but also the *orientation triad* of human senses that gave cues during a dynamic motion of flight. 

a.) Vision: responsible for 90% of all orientation cues, derived with reference to the Earth’s visual horizon – that human beings are so used to – gave Captain no perception of up-or-down orientation. Being a late night flight his body was up against its own bio-rhythmic levels of tolerance with the cravings of sleep. 

b.) The vestibular labyrinth <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Labyrinth_(inner_ear)> of the human ear - the otolith organs of the saccule and the utricle that judged changes in horizontal movement and vertical acceleration lagged in secreting fluid in Captain’s ear causing spatial disorientation. This sent conflicting messages to his brain that disagreed with… 

c.) The Kinaesthetic system of his body or the *seat of pants* sensation. 

Captain had no feelings of his tilting and the plane buoyed again and slanted. 

“... this can't be happening!!!” 

Junior made preparations to salvage the fall when a grinding noise from the business class section released a thud that rattled the whole aircraft. Seconds later, the forward cargo door blew out, the pressure differential caving in the main cabin floor and the ejected debris damaging engine number 2. 

From the black box recordings found weeks later, the crash investigation team heard, “Oh no! Oh no! There it goes!” amidst siren-like Klaxon calls. 

“That’s it.” 

Klaxon signals grew louder, “... this can't be happening!!!” 

K.P. Krishnan’s voice radioed, “Air Madhya Bharat Flight 008, do you hear me?” 

Loud siren wails punctuated a calm voice, “We’re finished.” 

“Ma, I love you,” said a smaller quivering voice. 

The siren calls lead to a huge wave-like sound that exploded into absolute quiet. 

K.P. Krishnan radioed, “Air Madhya Bharat Flight 008? Air Madhya Bharat Flight 008??” as a blinking dot on his screen snap-disappeared forever. 

*No. no. no. no. no..   no.   no.    no.     no.        no…* 

Sweat broke through his forehead, cramps erupted over his body and Kannan P. Krishnan was nailed for interrogation. 

*VI.              * *Locusts <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Locust> *(/for waste) 

Fisherman Ramkissoon’s vessel capsized. Its lifeboat acting as a helmet when wreckage flew in all directions, dotting the sea: wallets, purses, plastic cards, electronic devices, eyeglasses, dinner trays, life vests, hand luggage, food carts, suitcases, packing crates, cartons, and one lone sitar that went sinking down. Bodies torn or strapped to their seats floated around. 

The only living but stiffened man’s tears mingled with the salt of the sea. 

Once the sky and the waters grew quiet, Ramkissoon gripped the grab rail of his lifeboat and climbed over its top. He sat trembling on his haunches watching the sun come up. Though it was bright, the day seemed as dark as a scorpion. 

An hour later a life jacket, a food tray, a ripped part of a tire, an ID card and a headrest gathered around his boat. 

It was only then that he screamed. 

*VII.           * *Crutches *(/for weaknesses) 

The days passed in a blur. Linearly they were two days but otherwise they were the past, present and future, memory-springs of childhood, the naiveté of adolescence, exuberance of youth, the day of ATC Krishnan’s marriage, the foreplay dreams of parenting before becoming one. They were his first, second and third jobs. His final job. Or the building blocks and bricks of his family’s future with life-and-medical insurances, sound investments for a second home, and a good retirement plan. 

Monitoring planes all waking hours of his life had made Kannan P. Krishnan a grounded man. Abstract and lofty ideas were for other people, who lived on ground and hence needed flight. Not for him, whose mind was tuned to air, night and day. 

Even the worst years of his work life of cost-cutting and frozen pay scales, attrition and overworking were okay to recall. Or the ones with no major technical glitches, hijack, terror alert, false alarms or the year his aviation employer made maximum profits. Any year but now. Anything but today. This day, that didn’t feel like today but yesterday. Something in the past. Something not happening. Something happening to someone else. 

He receded into himself, recoiling far away from the blur of interrogations where he announced his answers with precision and alertness. His words played back into his ears. Sometimes he could hear his heartbeat, clear like a klaxon call. Sometimes that too left him. He forgot his address, sometimes his name. Sometimes his voice wouldn’t come out, or tea or water go in. Sometimes he lost his diction and words bent as if to show how they could have misbehaved even on the day of the accident which was – just yesterday.  His syllables broke around their legs with every new piece of information from the crash site. 

He could hear voices other than the ones spoken outside of his mouth. “Proof” and “clarity” reverberated as he moved from table to table, room to room, important authoritative person to more important commanding persons. “The complete failure of CRM (crew resource management)” resounded everywhere. 

And then just like that he was asked to leave the *offices*- *of-many-questions* and report to his worktable the next day. For a week, every time he heard more news of the crash, he would see outlines of things and people in two’s or three’s. His arms, legs, and back would arrest with the tingling numbness of marching ants. 

*VIII.             **Butterfly *(/for soul) 

From here her journey would be a vast one, between the times she had loved her son and the later years of intangible disconnection. *Could feeling seep into years of hardened unfeeling, cracking its walls with softness and warmth? That too old love? Did it have a place?* 

*She had been his mother for God’s sake.* 

She rose to phone Surajnath. He would have to be the first person to know, in any case. She wouldn’t be coming to his house, she told him. He shared her mute imaginings of the last moments of her son’s family’s lives. The ache of being human - unpredictably dispensable. 

Smita slipped her hand over her swollen wet face. She would have to note things down in a reliable diary. It would have to start from somewhere, anywhere, but it was better if it started from the beginning, where emotions were clearer, warmer and untainted by the miseries of expectations, the inner strife of trade offs and emotional bargains. 

*…The way she used to run after Sanju after school on his road to freedom. The way they planned out a calendar for his tenth standard board exams. The way he would tell her every detail of his first job; she had known the names of so many of his colleagues then...Priya, Raul, Wilson, Ajay and the one with that funny long surname…* 

She stood in front of the children’s bookshelf searching for an unused diary. 

It could then move to little Sameer and Priyanka when they were babies. *No. Not so fast. *There was more to her son’s childhood. She would have to go back slower over things -- his first crush with the girl from the opposite building - *Vanita Maddappa*?? Or still farther back when he had stood first in Class V. 

*There was a lot to catch up on. A lot to live by.  * 

Before condolers came and doorbells rang and clumps and pieces of her son’s soldered future and her present came flying in through the wrong window. 

Her thick umbilical knot easing… 

*II.* 

Krishnan’s job of so many moments and years had taught him to lean on nothing. Not his wife’s apprehension, his friends’ concern nor his colleagues’ support. 

He replayed each way that he could have guided or anticipated flight 008’s travel arc and fate, a hundred times over, scrutinizing every quiver of his mind and body on that day before gathering himself back into the gridlock of monitoring new flights where every moment’s alertness was the real zen, where the dregs of misfortune had to be winnowed in order to stand straight on the spine of the moment, *this present moment*. 

Weeks later after the black box recordings were thoroughly analyzed, it confirmed what the interrogations had revealed. 

A butterfly, chitin-veined-iridescent, flits... 

…away from the blue where human tissue detonated from prune body, feeding live fish and contaminating their fluid world as Harry Ramkissoon’s boat and life bobbed to a complete standstill. 

….atop Smita Arora’s morning window taking away many things heavy that broke off as words from her, forming memories in a diary. A clean running hand writing filling up pages and crevices of her life. 

…over Kannan P. Krishnan’s work desk and rejuvenating brew, taking with it the ill-feeling of human fallacy, both of judgement and behaviour. 

*(Dali symbols used) 

*End* 