From: Tupur Chatterjee <tupurc@gmail.com>
Date: 1 July 2016 at 10:02
Subject: Submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Biographical information: Tupur Chatterjee is a PhD Candidate at the Department of Radio Television Film at the University of Texas at Austin. She works on theater architecture and film exhibition in India. 


Evening Show 

Tara was worried they wouldn’t let Ayaz enter, so she volunteered to carry his backpack. The trick worked, as it had, several times before. She managed to squeeze in with the thin trickle of women entering Sheila Cinema, clutching the backpack. 

*Bag mein kya hai? * 

*Kitabein* 

*Jayiye * 

Ayaz was taller than most of the other men in the queue, so Tara could see him as he moved closer to the entry gate. He was smiling as usual, winking at her. His eyes were clear and sparkling. She noticed the guard spending a few extra seconds searching through Ayaz’s pockets. After all, he looked distinctly foreign. Guards everywhere lingered on him a little longer. Tara was routinely embarrassed by this, but often let it pass, not knowing what to do or say. 

I’m used to it, Ayaz would say, quite cheerfully. 

They found each other, held hands and walked up to the balcony. Sheila was one of their favorites. Tara loved its minimalistic designs, the bright yellow mural and the most of all the quiet nonchalance it seemed to display in the face of the gory multiplex takeover. The staff was kind and non-intrusive. The ladies toilet was clean. 

Do you really prefer all that mirror-work at Golcha to this? She asked as they sat down on the balcony stairs, with two cups of sugary Nescafé. 

Most-definitely, it reminds me of the theaters in Aligarh. 

It looks like a rundown mujra place, you know. 

You can tell if the owners are Hindu or Muslim by looking at the artwork on the mirrors. Hindu owners like Krishna or Ramayana, while the Muslims preferred Mughal miniature. 

Groundbreaking. 

There were still 15 minutes left for the film to start, the foyer was chaotic. Children screeched and ran around, women scampered in and out of the toilets and *Joshiji*, the canteen manager, quickly managed to sell several packets of popcorn and even some of those horrid burgers. He was the one who had told Tara and Ayaz about Luc Durand, the 26-year-old Canadian architect. Durand, when passing through Delhi in 1961 had painted a striking mural that still adorns the main foyer of the cinema. It was bright yellow and very abstract, with big haphazard shapes. It gave the space a rather clean, optimistic aura. 

Tara and Ayaz watched these scenes, familiar *mise-en-scene*. They sipped their atrocious coffee. It was 6:30 pm, rather chilly, a January evening in the capital. 

Just put your hands in my pocket. Ayaz extended a small part of his thick grey pheran to her. 

No-- please, they will think we are up to no good. 

Do you want to watch the movie today? 

Not really, do you? 

No. 

They went to the cinema often. But they never watched any films. They bought the more expensive tickets: dress circle or balcony. They came in with the crowds and left them inside the hall. Sitting in the lobby or on the soft, torn sofas or the dusty staircases for the entire show, they talked over muffled cheers and the strains of songs. 

This odd behavior elicited mixed reactions from theater management. 

*Film shuru ho gayee hai * 

*Hame pata hai * 

*Aap lok andar nahin jayenge? * 

*Kuch der mein jaatein hai * 

Couples, and lovers of all kinds were permanent fixtures at cinema halls. But they usually looked for solace in the darkness. Tara and Ayaz preferred sitting outside. He slept early, so they avoided the night show. She woke up late; they never made it to the morning show. They worked in the afternoon. It was usually the evening show. 

On two or three such occasions, they were asked to leave. The management was convinced they would start something obscene on the stairs. Once a kind manager pleaded with them to take their business inside and do what they desired. Their presence outside, just sitting on the lobby for three hours, was unsettling. Ayaz, brilliant and warm, charmed them all into letting them just sit there. 

II 

Tara had lived in Delhi all her life. Her family was wealthy and life was relatively easy. She lived in a big, comfortable and sunlit house in Mukherjee Nagar. Her grandfather had fallen upon it in 1948 when he came from Multan. He started a bakery and a bookshop, both successful. People from all over the city came to buy bread and birthday cakes. They also made cookies dripping with butter and cashews, sponge and jam cakes and chocolate pastries. Tara’s legendary sweet tooth ran in her genes. She had no siblings. 

Her beauty was almost alarming. All her life, her parents had looked at her with wonder and awe. Like a rare bird had fleetingly appeared in their garden. What if it sensed your presence and flew away? Boys were scared. Girls were jealous. She had a difficult time making friends. 

Tara did fairly well in school and college and thought about journalism. Upon graduation, however, she felt no propensity to work. She joined a Master’s program in English but dropped out. For about three months she wanted to be a lawyer. That ambition too, waned. She was listless, half-doing this and that, starting and stopping haphazardly. At 28, she had decided that not everyone had to feel passionately about something they’d *like* to do with their lives. Some people had no calling. She was one of them. She spent most of her time reading. She poured over cookbooks and made meticulous notes in the margins after she had tried a particular recipe. She carefully observed the dish’s texture, taste, color and aroma. She wrote down possible substitutes for ingredients and how they would alter the temperament of the recipe. She meditated on how it would taste in another climate, in high altitude, where the water is different. Occasionally, she appeared at her grandfather’s bookstore and startled the quiet readers with her splendid beauty. 

When Ayaz had walked into the store, Tara had greeted him with an exasperated sigh. She was hardly surprised to recognize a stranger with such certainty. He was far from home, living in a tiny sliver of land called Pant Nagar. It was close to Nizamuddin, a post-partition refugee colony. There, a dying generation of old Sikh men still spoke fluent Farsi. On colder nights, when the air was dense, you could hear the *qawaalis* from the dargah in his tiny room. It smelled like grass flowers, juniper and pine. 

Their cinema hall sojourns had begun incidentally. Tara had found a recipe from Ayaz’s country in a collection titled  “Cooking with Indian Masters.” 

“I can make one dish from your part of the world. These lamb *keema* balls with dried milk and cardamom. It’s called *Mutsch*.” Tara had said, proudly. They were walking in Connaught Place. 

“You couldn’t be more wrong. First, the dish can be made with both lamb and beef. Two, it is not *keema*, which is ground meat but *matsh*, which is pounded meat. Three, the meat is called *matsh*, not the dish. Four, no dry milk, either milk, which makes it *aab gosh* or yogurt which makes it *yakheen*.” 

Startled by his insolence, Tara stopped. They were in front of Regal. Without a word she turned away from Ayaz and walked into the cinema. She bought a ticket and disappeared up the stairs. Taken aback, he quickly followed her in. 

She was standing there, looking at Dev Anand’s portrait. The film had begun almost 30 minutes ago. Her face was expressionless, but Ayaz knew what to say. 

*Aap hukum karein, apne dil jigar ki biryani banake khilayeingay aap k*o. 

Tara glowered as Ayaz cracked a smile. 

Why don’t you cook for me one day? He said. 

I don’t cook for strangers. 

You have Delhi Metro’s logic. *Kisi bhi anjaan wyekti se dosti na karein*. How can one befriend the one already befriended? 

They spent the next two hours talking inside Regal. It was a welcome respite from the late September heat. The large, vacant Art-Deco cinema was air-cooled. They both found the theater comforting, it was quiet and eerie; perfect landscape for a long conversation. Soon, it became their regular haunt. They eschewed coffee shops and restaurants, finding them noisy and insipid. Over the next two years, they made their way from Regal up north, to Golcha, Sheila and Excelsior. Their relationship was confined almost entirely within the spaces of the city’s last remaining, crumbling single-screens. 

Sometimes the theater staff joined their conversations.  In their most frequented cinemas, the managers had finally succumbed to the idea that the resident lovers would not be watching the film. They would try, then, to keep them enthralled through stories about the cinema itself. After all, they were in the business of entertainment. In the diplomatic hub of Colonial Delhi, Regal had ruled the “English Cinema” circuit with its grand chandeliers and scotch and soda for seven and half *annas*. It had palm trees and a lavish garden. It was the hippest spot in town, giving Delhi its first whiff of cosmopolitanism. In 1941, Nehru and the rest of the Congress High Command had rushed to see *Delhi Chalo*-- a film about Subhas Bose’s war with the British. The colonial government had nearly cancelled Regal’s license over the screening of this film. In the 1950s and 60s, several blockbuster Hindi films had premiered at Regal. Those were grand, glittering events, attended by all the big stars from Bombay. Long lines snaked through half of Connaught Place. Watching a show at Regal was sometimes more memorable than the film itself. 

Now it was just a disintegrating, decrepit hall. It played C-grade films in the mornings and switched to regular Bollywood fare in the afternoons and evenings. The nights were unpredictable. What it constantly echoed were its glory days--- large portraits of Hindi cinema’s stalwarts covers the walls. Among them are Raj Kapoor, Nargis, Dev Anand, Vyajantimala and Dilip Kumar. Regal’s manager, Amar Singh, 84, came to the theater everyday, though he had retired 20 years ago. He belonged to this cinema-- an old, familiar ghost. A few letters had fallen off its main facade. It said ‘RE__ __ L.” The impoverished theater was unable to even fix its name. 

Mr. Singh once told Tara and Ayaz that a special room was reserved for Raj Kapoor and Nargis when they came for the premieres of their films. Nobody was allowed to disturb them. 

Tara yearned to go into that room, now boarded up. 

Ayaz whistled…*do deewane sheher mein, raat mein aur dopeher mein….* 

IV 

Tara heard Ayaz screaming and woke up. It was 3:30 AM, and a snowstorm was raging outside. It was one of Boston’s coldest winters. She felt nauseous and sick to her stomach. She ran to the bathroom and vomited. Siddhartha came and stood behind her. 

The same dream again? 

The dreams had started 6 or 7 months ago, though she could not be sure. Tara was running barefoot through a heavily curfewed city till she reached a dead cinema hall. She did not recognize this place. She had never been here before. She could barely see the cinema through the dense fog. The facade was a faded blue and the shutters were down. Barbed wires surrounded the theater and as she looked up she saw gaunt faces of the dead staring down from the charred and broken windows.  The flesh was peeling off and the faces were melting. She could not take her eyes off it. Ayaz was inside, calling out to her. She was desperate to get in. Then his screams would begin-- Tara felt the pain, it was excruciating, searing through her like molten lead. 

I have recurring nightmares about an abandoned cinema hall in a strange city. Ayaz is trapped inside it. Tara had told her therapist after the first three months. 

Who is Ayaz? 

An old friend and lover 

When did you last speak with him? 

It has been six years 

Where is he now? 

I don’t know 

Is there any way of contacting him? 

No. It was a difficult separation. We decided not to be in touch 

What do you think these dreams mean? 

Ayaz has been devoured by a dead cinema hall 

She was prescribed Xanax for anxiety, Ambien for sleep and Fluoxetine for depression. She went for long runs and covered her dark circles with M.A.C’s most expensive concealer.  She taught at a local high school and put up a brave front in front of her students. She watched TV shows every evening and cooked gluten-free dinners. Her mother had carefully packed her collection of thickly annotated cookbooks and shipped them to Boston. In five years, she had not gotten around to unpacking those boxes. Siddhartha began to gently nudge into opening those. At night, Ayaz’s screams pierced through her thick, chemical-induced sleep like a sharp serrated knife. She woke up, again and again, shaken and de-drugged, as if drenched in ice-cold water. 

A year later, she found herself walking through the streets of a heavily curfewed and uncannily familiar city. It was winter again; the frost was bleeding into her bones. The roads were deserted. There were barely any streetlights. It was as if an entire city had been annihilated. She walked till she reached the familiar blue facade of Neelam Cinema. It was after sundown, it could have been 6:30 p.m or 2:30 a.m; both times were equally plausible. She had been here before. She touched the barbed wires. The cinema had been waiting for her a long time. 

Tara walked in. She had never seen a stranger cinema hall. Inside, the architecture had been appropriated and contorted beyond recognition. A few naked light bulbs hung from the ceiling. They floored the lobby with a harsh, blinding light. How long had these bulbs been lit? She was immediately filled with a deep longing for darkness. There were loudspeakers on the walls. The floors were littered with broken glass, electric wires, ropes, nails, pliers, screwdrivers, heaps of torn clothes and iron rods; stained with blood. The ticket counter inside was turned into makeshift room, army uniforms hung like laundry from the ‘Advance Booking’ window. 

Rumors about the haunted theater circulated like a rattling, restless wind in that anguished city. They said that the projectionist Noor was the first to vanish. When one of the army officers tried crushing his fingers with a hammer, Noor had dissolved. A frantic search ensued; all the captured inmates were gathered up and brutalized. One by one, like whiffs of smoke, they started disappearing. The electric wires hung like limp threads; the bodies jammed into them had dissipated. Splotches of blood remained upon the ropes but the mutilated men could not be traced. The cinema, packed with tortured prisoners, started to slowly empty out. Scared, confused and crazed, the soldiers abandoned the place. No one ventured here, not even during the day. The army tightened the barbed wires but kept a safe distance. On some nights, you could hear muffled screams from inside. But this was so commonplace in the city that the residents no longer thought about where they came from. 

As Tara walked further into the theater, a bleak shaft of light shone forth from the projectionist’s window. A faint smell of grass flowers, juniper and pine floated in like an early morning dream. She took a seat in the front stall, a solitary spectator in a desolate chamber. An old Hindi film was playing. Raj Kapoor and Nargis sang on screen 

*Yeh raat bheegi bheegi, yeh mast fizaayein* 

*Utha dheere dheere, woh chaand pyara pyara* 

*Kyun aag si lagake, gumsum hai chandni* 

*Sone bhi nahin deta, mausam ka yeh ishaara* 

[End] 

-- Tupur Chatterjee PhD Candidate Assistant Instructor University of Texas at Austin Department of Radio, Television and Film tupur@utexas.edu 