From: Pravin Vemuri <pravinvemuri@gmail.com>
Date: 9 July 2016 at 03:02
Subject: Submission
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>

*Down the Road* 

I smelt the cop even before he caught us coming out of the gate. I guess he was hiding in the nook behind the bar waiting for cheap fucks like us to get trashed and get on a bike. When I drive out of a place like that, I hustle out blind. People think of me as reckless. But I have been nicked by too many dirty cops hanging around the corners. And the only way out is by being reckless. The cops never chase. Mostly because they are too lazy, mostly because they know that there is another idiot come out right behind you. 

Bokha thought alike. He would had sped out of that dump too. Except the bike we had bummed that day was a piece of crap. It wouldn’t start for ages and when it did, it took hours to warm up to any reasonable speed. 

So the cop had us by our scruffs. He asked us for the bike’s papers. We shrugged and shook our heads. He asked us for money. We smiled and showed him our pockets. We had nothing: no cash, no coin, nothing of value and nothing to lose. He said he might as well lock us up for the night. Bokha laughed. We got nowhere to go, he said. 

It’s an obvious mistake to laugh at a cop when you got no money on you. Especially if you smell of cheap whiskey. But Bokha had a smart mouth on him. And a history of bad timing. And he got himself hit in the head for it. Twice. By that long stick that cops shouldn’t carry. Or use. They are meant for cattle, those things. 

When Bokha hit the ground, he hit so hard that he was out before the stick came to rest. There was a little bleeding but he hadn’t gotten his head bashed in or anything. He was still breathing. 

The cop told us to get the fuck out of there. 

How am I supposed to take him now, I asked him. 

He shrugged and walked in a circle around us. No one had left the bar after us. The lights switched off inside when Bokha got hit. And whoever was inside decided to stay put. 

I have seen many of you, the cop said. You always find a way. 

I could see him a little better now that he was standing under the streetlight. His name-strip said Gowda. He had heavy brows and a big, sweaty forehead. He was dark as dung and he was chewing tobacco. 

Seen all of you – bloody druggies, he said and spat the tobacco out. 

I remembered where I had seen him before. It was the time Bokha and I got busted because we had scored a pocketful of crystal in exchange for a bottle of brandy we had swiped from the wine shop behind the station. Another crazy idea in a series of life decisions we didn’t seem to have control over. 

It’s always a bad idea to steal from the place where cops drink from. They found us in the shadows behind the Marthoma church in the street behind. We were laid out, our brains cracked and scrambled. They dragged us out and threw us into the station’s holding cell. We had no money then, either. And no one to come get us out. Not even worth hitting or screaming at. I guess they felt sorry for us after a while. Gave us a couple of cigarettes when we wouldn’t stop begging. In the morning they threw water on us to rouse us up and kicked us out. 

Bokha started moaning every few minutes or so. It made what’s-his-name jumpy. 

Make him stop, he said. 

You got any water? I asked him. He shook his head. 

Then I need to go get some, I said and made my way back inside the bar. It took me some time to find my way around inside. It was dark but there were people still in there, drinking with the lights off. I asked aloud if there was a door at the back but no one answered. It smelt like urine and unwashed clothes. I shouted for some help but no one answered. Outside the cop had started to scream for me to come out. So I kept asking for help and they kept drinking as if the darkness could snuff out sound as well. In the dark I could sense them glaring at me. You motherfuckers are heartless, I snarled. They were rough men, most likely truckers, who probably didn’t speak any language I knew. Finally, the kid who served peanuts in that dump handed me a bottle of water after I began kicking things around in anger. Please leave, he said. And don’t let him in here. 

When I came out the cop was gone. So was Bokha. And so was the bike. 

When it started, it had started as a lucky day for us. I had found the wallet and Bokha had stolen the bike. To add to it, there was money inside the former and some petrol in the old Suzuki two-stroke.           Best day of my life, Bokha had declared throwing his hands up like he had won at the Olympics. When Bokha was in school, he used to draw graffiti all over the walls in the little boys’ rooms. His masterpieces were caricatures of his principal, Father Francis with his mouth held wide open, drawn on every urinal right where you had to aim. ‘Aim correctly!’ he had scribbled on the top of each one of the principal’s heads. He got caught only because he owned up to it. Because too many kids were getting beaten up for it, he said. And because Francis was lifting them up by their ears to get them to confess. 

And now he was either dead or missing. And I had nowhere to go. The night was quiet and the street lamps were spluttering out dead flies. So I started walking in the direction of the tread marks. Hoping that the cop would have left and I could atleast get the bike back. I wasn’t angry at Bokha. I should have been, but whatever we had smoked in the bar was kicking in. All that shouting and anger had warmed it into my blood and I felt like I was standing outside the door of a house where everything I wanted and everyone I loved was inside and all I wanted to do was to rest my head on the wood and pass out. 

I couldn’t have been mad at Bokha even if I wanted to be. Ours was a friendship of convenience. We had met a week to the day those cops busted us, only because we were hanging out at the same church for that occasional free meal and to bum cigarettes off those old men who were too pious to deny anyone anything within fifty feet of the place. We used to cross ourselves before we smoked any of them as a mark of respect. Of course, the crystal you could get around the church was no less divine. 

I found them few hundred meters away. Bokha was driving behind the cop. Hitting him with his own stick. Making him run. He let out a laugh when he saw me. Come and sit on the bike with me, he said. 

This is not a good idea, I told him. Let him go. 

You are such a pussy, Bokha said. 

Gowda was sweating like a pig. He was bleeding and his uniform was tearing at certain places. The look in his eyes felt like he knew he was going to die on that road, this night. 

Bokha kept hitting him. Mostly on his rump and then on his shoulders. And every time he did Gowda would squeal. If it had been any other time, I would have been laughing until I popped a blood vessel or something. But this was a cop who knew us. And he was screaming at us to stop before it was too late. That he would make us pay. You can’t fuck with cops, he said. Then Bokha hit him on the side of his face. Right on his ear to make it go ‘keeeeeee’. 

I screamed at Bokha let him go. Let’s turn around and get the hell out of here. Out of this town. This place blows anyway. Bokha laughed. There was no malice in it. It was joyous, like how babies sound when you make faces at them. 

We stopped when we heard the truck. 

Who can that be? Bokha said. 

I turned around and I could see the truck still some distance away. Its headlights forming giant halos in the dark of the night like a pair of avenging angels. 

*Friends of yours?* 

For a moment, standing there, it felt the space around me had rarified. 

*Are you all right? * 

I shook my head. And I walked towards the side of the road and then started running into the fields. 

*Where are you going?* 

I didn’t stop. I didn’t look back. I ran fierce. Like there was still some fight left in me. As if all the light in the universe was heading in this direction. And I had to escape before it found me in the darkness. 

I ran until the sounds went out. Until the night entered my head like a cloud and wiped everything out and the cold dark wind held my legs and tipped me over. 

When I woke up I found myself closeted among acres of tilled land. My clothes were as grimy as they always were but they now stank of soil and manure. Every muscle in my body was sore. My head was pounding and my throat had run dry. I must have been miles away from the road. The only thing I could make out was which direction I had come in from. So I stood up and started walking in the opposite. 

There were acres and acres of paddy around me. It was almost noon and the sun was scorching. I drank from every pump or tap I could find on the bunds. The farmers had finished their work in the early hours of the day as was the practice in these parts so there wasn’t anyone around to point me in any direction. 

I must have walked for hours before I heard noises of traffic and followed them to meet the road. There was a bus stand just north of where I was. I could get some food there and maybe even a ride out of town. 

I had twenty rupees in my underpants, the last of last night’s largesse. I had to eat and buy a ticket. Which meant I would have nothing left for any cigarettes. So I went by the corner where everyone smoked and stared picking out as many stubs that still had some tobacco in them. I smoked about a dozen of them before it burnt my throat and choked my eyes. 

I must have been stinking as I got around to buying some food and a bus ticket but atleast I was at peace and I had something of a plan. The first bus out of that place was yet to come, so we crowded around the platform placing ourselves to get inside the bus as soon as it came to grab a seat. There, among those lucky enough to find a bench on the platform, was the kid from the bar. The one who served peanuts. He was sitting with his head held down. When I came closer I saw the bruises on his hands and face. 

What happened to you, I asked him when I got closer. He shook his head. He didn’t look up but he knew it was me. 

Where are you going? I asked him. The kid shook his head again and sighed. Or maybe he let out a sob. I couldn’t tell. There was a cacophony around us. 

I could tell the kid had no ticket. Probably had no money on him. And he was in pain. There was some scabbing on his hands too. He had bled a little. 

I am not much of a Christian. I haven’t had the opportunity to do unto others or any of that. What people don’t get is that the concept of selflessness is essentially an evil construct created for the weak to feel deeply guilty about those who are only slightly less fortunate. 

But I must have been hanging around churches for just too long, I guess. I pulled the kid’s hand out and stuffed my ticket in it. He looked up finally and nodded. Is that all I get, I thought. If I weren’t so tired and sore, I would have snatched it back. But my body felt like a gaping wound and I walked again to the corner and picked up half smoked cigarettes and began to burn my lips, mouth and throat. 

When the bus came there was clamoring, screaming and shouting. The kid got in somehow. He didn’t look back at me or anything. Just sat down and lowered his head. When the bus left it cleared out the place. 

I walked around the place a few times. Until I got too tired. And came and sat in the same place I found the boy. Hoping that it would bring some luck. 

After all, I had nowhere to go. And all I wanted was to get the hell out of there. 

[END] 

Brief Bio: BIO: Pravin Vemuri is a technology marketer from Bangalore. He dabbles in fiction, sports writing and app design. . 