From: Lahari Mahalanabish <lahari.mahalanabish@gmail.com>
Date: 3 July 2016 at 13:45
Subject: SUBMISSION
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Lovesick Madam 

Wiping off the sweat from my face with my napkin, I gulped down some water. Then I drew down the glass pane but instead of the pleasant breeze I had hoped for, I was hit by gusts of dry wind. The merciless sun charred my skin and as I hurried to roll up the window, an assortment of new sounds and smells vied with the heat to overrule my senses. My nostrils were assailed by a strong perfume and my ears were captured by the clatter of bangles, tinkling of anklets, swish of  a heavy pallu and  the clicking of high heels. I turned to find a woman in a deep red sari with several necklaces; one of pearl and two of gold dangling down her chest, weighty earrings swinging as she moved her head and a ring with a huge gemstone encircling her finger. Such unabashed dominance of red and gold in the punishing heat could only induce imageries of suffering and death. I felt as if she was blazing before me like a cremation pyre. 

“Can I sit beside the window?” she asked. 

“No,” I replied without batting an eyelid. She continued to implore the other passengers to vacate a window seat for her. I craned my neck to find that none of the window seats were empty and no passenger wanted to budge from his position. Finally she gave up and settled down in a seat diagonally opposite to mine, beside a middle-aged lady who was clicking away at her mobile phone. I rummaged through my overstuffed bag till my fingers brushed against the smooth edge of my cellphone. I called up my parents to check whether my daughter had eaten her breakfast, and whether she had completed her homework the evening before. As I finished the call, a message from my husband beeped, “Enjoy Your Trip”. I smiled and looked towards the front of the bus. The driver flung open the door next to the steering wheel and leapt into his seat. 

Soon the engine roared and we breezed past the trees, hopped along the rickety bridges and lost count of the signboards declaring the identities of roads and rivers. The ribbon of changing sights stopped unfurling as the bus halted at a petrol pump. My eyes shifted from the window to the overdressed lady who had dozed off by then. A shiny bindi sparkled on her forehead, thick kohl rimmed her eyes, and a bright red shade of lipstick coloured her lips. The vermillion sprinkled in the parting of her hair clarified her marital status. I wondered why a married woman would visit Phurian alone. Isn’t one supposed to gain maximum blessings by praying at the holy ‘bowls’ along with her significant other? Yes, I am a married woman too, travelling to Phurian alone, but I had been deputed to the newest branch of my office for a fortnight to conduct trainings, and I could not resist the idea of a daytrip to this spot just a couple hours away from the city. She could not be an office employee – I concluded with a scowl, as she unknowingly slanted towards the passenger next to her; her sleepy head rolling from side to side, the bottom edge of her sari hitched above her ankles revealing a snatch of petticoat, the end of her pallu touching the dust of the bus floor, and blouse slipping off her left shoulder exposing a bra strap. One possible explanation was that her husband stayed in a different location. Who wouldn’t like to maintain a long distance from such a clown of a wife? I hid my grimace by popping a lozenge into my mouth. 

The driver turned on the music system as the bus pulled out of the petrol station. Jerked out of her reverie, the woman wiped her eyes, adjusted her sari and brushed back a few wayward strands of hair. The first song ended and the second one began. I rather liked its tune and began to tap my feet to the rhythm. The lyrics were peppered with words like ‘Love’, ‘Desire’ and so on. The woman parted her lips to sing along although I could not hear her voice. To my amusement, her lips often ended up parting more to make room for smiles, and at the same time, a glow appeared on her cheeks and her eyes frequently closed to open again with a fresh spark. Who could be the reason behind these smiles and lovey-dovey expressions? Was it her husband or someone else? Was she going to Phurian all alone to meet that ‘someone else’. That fellow certainly had bad taste, I sniggered soundlessly and nicknamed her ‘Lovesick Madam’. 

According to the legend, one afternoon during their exile, the Pandavas came across a man from Ekachakranagar, the city Bhima had saved from the demon Bakrasura. He was on his way to his father-in-law’s house to see his newborn son and happened to be carrying a lot of fruits, nuts, sweets and other delicacies. Out of gratitude towards the Pandavas and also to celebrate the birth of his child, he offered them a considerable portion of the food in his basket. However, he did not have any spare bowls for the five brothers to have their food. Noticing five spotlessly clean dents in the rocks near the river bank, the brothers gently placed the food within these hollows and settled down to savour them. Draupadi picked up a few morsels from each of the five depressions in rock, which came to be regarded as blessed, especially for couples. 

Mahabharata with its maze of stories and sub-stories was a source of endless fascination for me. Despite the sweltering heat, I was grateful to the Almighty for an opportunity to visit this wee little village associated with the epic. We had to queue up outside the bamboo fence erected around the five hollows which are often referred as the five ‘bowls’. Our umbrellas could give us only a little respite from the wrath of the sun, as sweat dripped down our limbs and patched our clothes. Lovesick Madam and I were separated by two people in the queue. The gaiety of the song played in the bus had not left her. Absentmindedly twirling the edge of her pallu with her hand, her eyes partly closed, she continued to hum the tune. I decided to ignore her presence and focus on the scenery instead. Bordered by brown, egg shaped boulders, the river murmured on my right. The sparkling blue water rose into silver tinged waves whenever the wind picked up. Pairs of roundish hills which looked tiny across the width of the river, resembled halves of peanut shells split along the length. On my left, the forests weaved a collage of varied shades of green, striped by the ash-brown tree trunks. A certain variety of deep pink flower appeared as sporadically as the festival dates in a calendar. I seized this moment to bring out my binoculars and catch a bird hiding among the foliage or a squirrel scurrying towards it nest. 

Nudged by the person behind me, I realized how quickly the minutes had flown by. It was now my turn to enter through the gates into the fenced area. I carefully treaded upon the rocky ground to reach the sacred spot. I kneeled down, lifted my pallu to cover my head, repeated the Sanskrit words chanted by the priest, who also handed me a couple of marigolds which I had to tear and bestrew on the strips of rock separating the hollows. I looked into the holes; their smooth walls gleamed. The chocolate brown surface at the bottom was uniform except for a few streaks of silvery-grey minerals. The river breeze scattered the petals, shook the leaves of Tulsi plants grown in pots within the enclosure, and fluttered the strip of cloth around the priest’s neck. It caressed my skin, stroked my hair, and flicked off the beads of sweat dotting my face. Directed by the priest, I picked up one of the fruits from the basket I was carrying with me, placed it gently in the center of one of the five dents, cupped it with my palms, prayed for the well being of my family, and then placed it back inside the basket to be eaten, when the departing sun would peep from the horizon like a child reaching just a little above his balcony railing. The same ritual was performed for each of the five ‘bowls’ with five different fruits and I missed my husband terribly, wishing he was beside me, like the other men who had prayed along with their wives, before my turn came. 

I was hungry by the time I stepped out of the enclosure. During the bus journey itself, I had formed an idea about the location of the eateries by querying my co-passengers. I paced through the street, past the bus terminus, and spotted the driver who had brought us here. He was speaking to a man in a mechanics shop, beside a tree with a trunk tilted like a gear handle and spare tyres dangling from its leafless branches. I took a right turn and marched ahead, leaving behind rows of huts and agricultural fields, to arrive at a small expanse of yellowing grass. A number of eateries hemmed this area; the first two were overcrowded. Locating a vacant seat in the third one, I promptly occupied it. Across the grassy stretch, several dwellings jostled with one another other before the terrain sloped down to a canal, which had dried except for a few shallow patches of water separated by rough squares of cracked earth. I sighted a teenager braiding the hair of a younger girl, who sat on one of the three steps leading to the front door of their single storied house. A woman stepped out of the next house to scatter wheat grains for the pigeons, and a man climbed up a ladder to inspect a gap on the roof caused by a missing tile. 

Since it was forbidden in the village of Phurian, also known as Bartanpur, to have rice before consuming the blessed fruits, the menu comprised only of chapattis, puris, parathas, a variety of pickles, potato curry, preparations of cauliflowers or brinjals or cabbages, and curd. Perched on a wooden bench and almost stooping over a low table, I tore through the parathas, dipped each piece in the thick gravy, folded it into a cone to scoop in a chunk of potato and push it into my mouth. A ceiling fan with a long down rod whirled over my head. Feeling a tug at my sari, I looked up from my plate. A child, about eight years of age, with eyes sunk into his sockets, held out his open palm, begging for alms in a shrill voice. I glanced over his chafed lips, dripping nose, swollen belly and matted hair. One of the waiters strode forward to shoo him away. “Please serve him a plate of puris and a bowl of potato curry. I’ll pay,” I told the waiter quickly and gestured the child to sit beside me. I always avoided giving coins to beggars since I believed they were controlled by racketeers who would snatch away the money. There were eleven other tables. Many of the devotees who had travelled with me in the same bus, were having their lunch at this eatery. I could feel them staring at me as the child sneezed and coughed, though not letting these interruptions diminish the pace with which he bulldozed his hunger; wolfing down slices after slices of potato shrouded in pieces of white, glistening puris. Dismayed but unsurprised, I saw Lovesick Madam drop on the bench opposite to me. I scrutinized her expression, daring her to eye me with contempt like the others in the eatery, but she seemed totally heedless of me or my little companion. Her chewing often had to play second fiddle to her smiling as she would frequently flash a stretch of her upper row of teeth, now stained with gravy. Sometimes, she would even shake with mirth like the leaf of a touch-me-plant expanding after the recoil. Poking in the dents of the age old table with the front finger of my left hand, I wondered what she could be day-dreaming about. Crazy woman! 

The little boy finished his meal before me, picked up a jug of water from one of the tables, stepped out of the eatery and washed his hands. Returning the jug to its table, he wiped his hands on his faded shorts, gave me a half smile and scurried towards the settlement. Lovesick Madam’s plate was almost full when I got up from my chair. As the eatery lacked plumbing facilities, I could either rinse my hands with the water from the jug like the boy or wash them at a basin, attached to the outside wall of the common toilet of the settlement, across the grassy patch. Since my hands were greasy and I could recognize even from this distance, the blue and green container of the liquid soap I usually used at home, kept on a shelf above the basin, I walked towards the toilet, crushing the dried grass under my feet. My mobile phone rang. 

“Shall we go to Sanjay’s place on the 23rd?” my husband asked. 

“Is 23rd Saturday or Sunday?” I wondered. 

“Sunday,” he replied. 

“No, let’s go on Saturday,” I said. 

“Saturday....Saturday....OK...done,” he agreed. 

“Madam, please hurry up,” I heard voices behind me as I had reached the basin and  happened to be blocking it. 

“Bye. Will call you later,” I said and quickly tried to unzip my handbag to drop the mobile into its depths, beside my purse and make-up kit. However, I found that the zipper had got jammed. 

“Madam, fast,” another voice urged. 

I realized that I would not succeed with the zipper with my left hand alone and decided to try after washing my right hand, the fingers at present being caked with gravy. Placing the mobile phone on the shelf, I rinsed my hands with the liquid soap. As I wiped them with a napkin which remained tucked at my waist at other times, I sighted a white bearded vendor hawking his wares. Beautiful silk scarves with floral patterns peeped out of a cloth bag slung over his shoulder, colourful necklaces were wound around his arms and tiny teddy bears swung from the strings fastened to his fingers. Whenever I had stepped out my hometown, I had never returned without gifts for my mother, daughter and sister-in-law. 

I trotted towards the vendor who had positioned himself near the door of one the eateries. After a few minutes of haggling, we settled down for a price. With both hands free now, I was successful in unzipping the bag. While fishing out the purse, I was reminded of the mobile phone. I had forgotten to pick it from the shelf after washing my hands. I darted to the basin, bursting with anxiety. The cellphone was not there. My heart skipped a beat and I stood as if stunned, overcome with self-loathing. How could I be so careless? The people who had queued behind me at the basin; those who were urging me to hurry up, had rinsed their hands and left. There was no one in sight except Lovesick Madam who had finished her meal by then, and was pressing the liquid soap container to squeeze out a drop. 

I turned to my left and to my right, paced back and forth, scratched my head, bit my lips, unable to decide where to look and what to do. 

“Any problem?” Lovesick Madam asked. I was too disturbed by my own blunder to be annoyed with her. 

“I can’t find my mobile phone. I had left it on the shelf above the basin and forgotten.” 

“Let’s go to each of these houses and ask,” she suggested. 

“Why would anybody confess to having stolen it?” I snapped, the irritation coming back in a jolt. 

“Somebody might have picked it up to return it to its rightful owner,” she calmly replied. 

We knocked on several doors but nobody admitted seeing a mobile phone lying around. Finally we arrived at a house at the edge of the settlement and knocked. There was no response. 

“I can hear some voices,” Lovesick Madam cupped her right ear and tiptoed towards a window, followed by me. To my utter horror, I found a man in his late thirties - with puffy eyes, swollen cheeks, belly bulging over his lungi and curly black hair carpeting his chest, land one slap on a child’s cheek – the beggar child I had fed. The man clutched the child’s hair and slapped him again. The boy’s mouth opened and his face contorted in pain but we could not hear his screams outside the locked window. I stood frozen and drained out of my wits. 

“He must be one of the heads of a begging racket,” I managed to mutter weakly. 

“Yes, I also think so. He is hurting the child because he had combated his hunger instead of bringing him any money. But you have done the right thing madam by feeding him,” she assured. I was surprised to hear that she had noticed me and the child at the eatery after all. 

The next thing I knew was that she had run to the door and disengaged a clip from her hair. I hopped behind her; curious and scared at the same time. She bent open the clip and thrust it into the keyhole. With a few twists of her hand, the lock was undone. She yanked open the door and stepped inside. I stood hesitant at the doorway; my heart racing, my fingers trembling and my legs immobilized by fear. She kicked open her sandals and picked them up. Brandishing the sandals in both hands like swords she hurried towards the room where the man was beating up the boy. A sharp cry, presumably of the child, propelled me to suppress my fears and follow her. I peered into the room to find the boy clutching himself in pain, his fingers just below a raw and ugly bruise on his upper arm; the kind of wound inflicted by a glowing cigarette stub. Noticing us, the man’s eyes glowered like a predator’s before the pounce. Without wasting a second, the woman brought down both the high heeled sandals on the man’s head and shoulders with all the strength she could muster. The man, enraged and flabbergasted, tried to grab her by the waist, but missed. Maddened further, he kicked at her stomach. I pushed open the window, yelling for help. She doubled over in pain but sprang back to her full height before his large hands could land on her. Then, she punched his face, ensuring that the heavy stone on her ring would plunge into his cheeks. He gripped her hand, but she hit his arm with her other hand, and grazed it with her bangles to scratch his wrist. He clutched at her throat with his pudgy fingers. She was quick to fasten her pallu round his neck and give it a pull. He spluttered and ended up loosening his clasp. We heard footsteps just outside the door, which we had left open. I hoped these people had come to help, alerted by my cries. As the commotion grew, the brute tried to run away through another door, but the woman had pulled open her pearl necklace and ripped it apart. The pearls hit the floor, rolled over, and caused the fleeing man to trip. He fell upon the ground with a heavy thud, his body curled, as he winced in pain. The room got filled with people; there was a crowd of men, women and children, their expressions etched into questions. I quickly explained to them what we had witnessed. 

The police arrived within a few minutes and hauled the man away. I brought out the tube of antiseptic cream from my bag and applied it on the boy’s bruises. I helped the woman pick up her pearls, which had rolled beneath the furniture, and put them inside a plastic box, handed to us by one of the villagers. Both of us were given glassfuls of cool water to drink. The water ran down my parched throat, drowning the jaggedness of my voice which had gone hoarse with all the shouting. The woman gulped down some of the water in her glass and sprinkled the rest on herself. There was only a trace of make-up left on her face. And I learnt that her name was Prerna. 

As the sun dipped into the river, we sat down on the rocks and bit into the fruits. The loss of the mobile phone weighed heavy on my chest, but I chose not to waste my last few minutes in Bartanpur lamenting about it. I had already deactivated my number by calling the customer care service, and had also taken time to file a complaint at the local police station, besides informing my husband about the theft. The bus would wait long enough for us to light lamps and set them afloat in the river. Sitting on one of the steps leading to the waters, Prerna struck a matchbox with a matchstick, and held the flame against the tip of the thread stretched along the length of the clay lamp. The newborn flame shook like the wings of an injured moth. I quickly cupped my hands around the lamp and the flame steadied. Prerna picked up her lamp, brought it closer to mine, and lit up my lamp with its flame. Then we placed both our lamps in the water, folded our hands to pray and climbed up the steps. 

I looked out of the window as the bus started. From this distance, the dots of flames trailed by the glowing bodies of their lamps looked like tailed comets. Beyond the floating lamps, the water was a dark strip merging with the silhouettes of hills. A sudden gust of cool breeze bearing the scent of rain drew  gasps of relief from the couple seated behind me. My gaze swivelled to the opposite window; the arjuna trees rubbed their crests of leaves against the swiftly forming clouds. The driver turned on the music system but Prerna was deprived of any opportunity to sing, as she was being bombarded with questions from admiring, fellow passengers, who had come to know that she had taken on a criminal to rescue a child. I found myself singing and even smiling, not dreaming about some ‘secret lover’ but wondering what other surprises life has in store for me. 

Biography 

Lahari Mahalanabish is a software engineer by profession. Her book of poems entitled *One Hundred Poems *had been published by Writers Workshop, India. Her short stories have appeared in Muse India, Himal Southasia, The Criterion, Ashvamegh..The Literary Flight and The Asian Age. Her poems have found place in Yellow Chair Review, Poets Online, Saw, The Statesman and The Hans India. She lives in Kolkata, India with her two year old daughter, husband and parents. 