From: Nadia <nadiabarb@msn.com>
Date: 16 August 2016 at 20:12
Subject: Submission
To: "outofprintmagazine@gmail.com" <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>

Nadia Kabir Barb has been a long standing columnist for the Star Magazine (The Daily Star Newspaper, Bangladesh) with her column ‘Straight Talk’. A British Bangladeshi living in London, she draws inspiration from her multicultural background with her articles ranging from social and political issues to humorous and often irreverent observations of life in general. She graduated with a Masters from the London School of Economics and the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine and has worked in the health and development sector in the UK and Bangladesh. Her short stories ‘Let Me Go’ and ‘The Lives of Others’ were selected as Story of the Week by The Missing Slate arts and literary magazine. She was also chosen as their ‘Author of the Month’. Her short story ‘Inside the Birdcage’ was recently published in Issue 17 of The Open Road Review literary magazine. 

*‘My Fathers Daughter’* 

“One more thing, your father’s going to be at Sophia’s wedding…I just wanted you to know.” 

There was silence on both sides. Open heart surgery *sans* general anaesthetic would have been preferable to an encounter with her father. At least the cuts would be surgical and clean unlike the wounds he inflicted, deep and messy. 

“I’ll see you tomorrow, bye Ma, love you.” Maliha put the phone down and sank back onto the bed. 

She closed her eyes while she tried to digest this unwelcome piece of news. The morning had not started the way she would have liked it. Now she wished she had just left the phone ringing. But it had had the stubborn persistence of a mosquito buzzing in her ear adamant to get its drop of blood or at least deprive its mark of any further sleep. So she had finally given up and answered it. 

Her mother had not been impressed with the fact that she was still in bed when she called. What Maliha decided not to divulge was that she hadn’t even heard the alarm go off earlier in the morning. 

Maybe it wouldn’t have been such a bad thing if she had missed the flight. Her father was like a hurricane creating chaos and turmoil in his wake. Every time she had her emotions under control and told herself she was better off without him, he would breeze into her life oblivious to the pain he was causing. 

The older she got the less willing she was to put herself through this emotional rollercoaster. Over the past few years when he had wanted to ‘catch up’ because he was passing through London for work, she had made herself unavailable. The excuse of long and erratic hours at the magazine was her staple excuse. She had made poor Richard out to be a tyrant and hard task master. The last thing she wanted was to sit and listen to her father regale her with stories of his other family. 

It couldn’t have been more than five or six times she had seen him since her eighteenth birthday. Back then she had been naïve enough to believe he actually cared about her. That was then, she wasn’t naïve any more. 

Maliha let out a deep sigh and rolled off her bed. She looked at the clock – just enough time to have a shower. Not enough time for breakfast – the blackened solitary banana sitting in her fruit bowl would have to do. 

She put the finishing touches to her packing which included a bit of rummaging around in her wardrobe. This was to retrieve the bottle green sari she had glibly told her mother she had already packed which was then thrown unceremoniously into her suitcase before zipping it up and rushing into the bathroom. 

She needn’t have hurried - the cab arrived late. Maliha checked one more time to make sure the alarm was on and the lights switched off before closing the front door behind her. The cab driver smiled at her but Maliha got into the backseat and let him hoist her suitcase into the boot. 

She took out her phone and went through her messages. There was one from Richard. “Have a great time and don’t think about work! Will miss you”. He had insisted that she should have a proper holiday and not fret about work while she was away. The magazine would get by without her for a few weeks. That was what worried her. She didn’t want them or rather him to get too used to her being way. She thought of writing “will miss you too” but sent him a brief “Will try!” instead. Even with Richard, her instinct of self-preservation hindered her ability to let him get too close to her. People couldn’t hurt you if you didn’t let them. 

There was a message from Sarah wishing her a safe journey and one from Sophia telling her she couldn’t wait to see her in Dhaka. 

Maliha didn’t have the heart to tell Sophia that she really hadn’t wanted to go on this trip. She would rather be settling into her new flat. Her mother had insisted she get a place of her own instead of throwing money away on rent. Buying a place was a commitment she wasn’t sure she was ready to burden herself with but after endless procrastination she had capitulated. Now she was the proud owner of a two bedroom flat in Kilburn with a new found respect for first time home buyers in London and sympathy for those attempting to get on the property ladder. She was grateful to her mother for helping out with the deposit. 

At the moment she had a bed, a sofa and a book shelf the previous owner had left behind. The boxes of her stuff piled in each room would have to be dealt with on her return. 

She had let herself be bullied into attending the wedding by both Sophia and her mother. Sophia had called her a few months prior to the wedding and made her promise she would be there. Her mother had simply told her that the flat would still be there in a few weeks, while the wedding would not. She couldn’t argue with that logic. At least Sophia was one of the few relatives she enjoyed spending time with. 

Just the thought of two weeks in the company of the rest of her extended family was a daunting prospect. There would be raised eyebrows, whispering and worst of all looks of sympathy thrown her way. Her single status was a topic of discussion amongst some of her relatives but one she could handle. It was her decision not to see her father or stay in touch with him that had caused quite a stir and something she didn’t want to discuss with anyone. 

Her thoughts were interrupted by the driver saying something to her. 

“Sorry?” she said. 

“No, no I’m sorry for being late, the last customer took too much time coming out of the house, but don’t worry I’ll get you to the airport in time.” He looked at her through the rear view mirror and smiled. 

“So are you going on a holiday or is it a business trip?” 

She was in no mood for chit chat. “Holiday,” she replied. 

“Where are you going, India?” he looked at her through the mirror again. 

“No, Bangladesh.” 

“Oh, I’m from India but I went to Bangladesh about twenty years ago. Very good people there. Your family lives there?” 

Maliha rolled her eyes. He really wasn’t taking the hint. 

“Yes my mother lives there now.” 

“That’s nice. You’re going to see her?” The driver had a nice gentle voice. 

“Yes, we have a family wedding.” 

“And your father, he’s in Bangladesh too?” 

Maliha hesitated, “No, he’s dead.” 

The driver seemed taken aback by her statement. It had probably come out a bit too matter of fact. 

“So, sorry dear.”  He looked at her through the mirror. This time he wasn’t smiling and he looked genuinely sorry. 

She felt a fleeting moment of guilt about the lie but it was easier than telling the truth. 

It was not the first time she had pretended he was dead in conversation. The lie seemed to have had the desired effect and no further words passed between them until they arrived at Heathrow. 

“Here we are! I told you we’d get here with time to spare,” he took her suitcase out, “have a lovely time.” 

Maliha took her suitcase from him and smiled back. She felt bad for being so churlish and gave him a larger tip than she had initially intended. 

Once on board, she hoped that the seats next to her wouldn’t be occupied, but the flight was packed and every single seat in economy was full. She glanced at her neighbours and was relieved to see it was an elderly lady and a bespectacled young man. If she was lucky, they wouldn’t be overly friendly or want to chat the entirety of the journey. It could have been worse, she might have been seated next to some middle aged man who would spend the whole flight consuming copious amounts of free alcohol and insist on flirting with her, an experience she had had more times than she cared to remember. 

The man next to the elderly woman was helping her put some hand luggage away under the seat in front and passing her a bottle of water. She thought he might be the same age as herself or a little younger. He smiled at her and she gave him a perfunctory smile back. The last thing she wanted was to encourage a conversation. 

She watched through the corner of her eye as the young man made his mother comfortable by giving her his pillow and taking the blanket out of its plastic cover and gently tucking it around her. 

Her mother’s decision to move back to Dhaka to be with Maliha’s ailing grandmother over a year ago had left a vacuum in her life. Although they spoke regularly, it wasn’t the same. It had just been the two of them since her father had packed his bags and walked out of their lives when she was twelve. Even at university, she had chosen to stay at home rather than move into halls of residence. 

She had come home from school one day to find her mother in tears in the kitchen and her father standing in the hallway with his suitcases. Her mother never cried when he went on business trips and he never took the big suitcases with him. She could sense that this was more than the usual arguments.  This was not going to end with the slamming of a door somewhere. 

He had walked to her and knelt on the floor. “Sweetheart, I have to go away for a while but I’ll see you soon,” he had said giving her a hug. 

She had cried into the coat he was wearing and refused to let go until he disentangled her arms from around him and walked out the door. He hadn’t even looked back. Soon the divorce papers had come to the house, he on the other hand had not. 

She could still remember the smell of his aftershave. Even now if she smelt it on someone or in the shops it made her nauseous. 

It was remiss of her not to have realised her father was going to be at the wedding. The thought of having to be civil to him in front of everyone else was galling. The rest of the family would be watching like hawks to see how the Mirza family soap opera unfolded. 

“Please fasten your seatbelts...” said the voice on the overhead speaker. Maliha took off her shoes before retrieving her book from her hand bag. Finally she put her seatbelt on and sat back in her seat. 

She opened the book and after a few minutes realised she was still staring at page 85. The words seemed to stare back at her. 

Maliha reached in her bag for her iPod.  Earphones were such a wonderful way of being able to ignore people around you without offending anyone. Once the flight took off she closed her eyes and let the music block out the humming of the engines, the sound of the babies crying and the gentle chatter of the passengers. 

Even with her earphones on and book in hand, she was acutely aware that the lady next to her was in quite a bit of discomfort. 

“Try putting your legs up,” she could hear the young man telling his mother. He looked worried. 

She took her earphone out and turned to the lady, “Are you ok?” 

The lady looked small and frail in the seat. She nodded her head. 

“My mother had knee surgery a while ago and it’s still hard for her to sit for too long,” interjected the young man. 

“Oh, I see, if there’s anything I can do...” 

They both smiled at her. 

After a while she got up to use the toilets. It would be prudent to use them while they were still clean. Luckily there was no queue. 

On her way back to her seat, she spotted a little orange bear lying on the floor. Its left eye was missing and looked like it had had its fair share of adventures. There was a little girl sitting on the aisle seat and Maliha picked the bear up and handed it to her. The little girl beamed at her showing her missing front teeth and Maliha smiled back. There was something familiar about the girl. She had an elfin face with high cheekbones. 

Maliha sat back in her seat and took out the inflight magazine to see what films were on. She could always catch up on some films if sleep eluded her. The last film she had seen was with Richard. They had spent the weekend holed up in his flat having a movie marathon and ordering in. It wasn’t common knowledge in the office that they were seeing each other. Unlike Richard, she thought it would be a bad idea to make their relationship public especially if things didn’t work out.  There was also the inevitable office politics to consider. 

She looked up and saw the little girl getting up from her seat. The woman next to the girl got up as well. The woman turned and Maliha got a clear view of her face. Life was obviously playing a very cruel joke on her. It was her father’s current wife. She ducked her head so the wife wouldn’t see her and ended up banging it on the seat in front. For a split second she panicked thinking her father might be with them. It occurred to her that it would have been impossible to miss him if he had been travelling with them. 

The elderly lady asked if Maliha was alright. 

“Yes, I’m fine thanks,” she said in a low voice. 

The girl and the mother must have headed to the toilets. Maliha hid behind the magazine while keeping an eye out for them. She wanted to take a good look at the woman who taken her father away from her. It had been eight years since she had last seen her. 

As they returned to their seats, Maliha noted that time had not been kind to the wife and her face looked careworn even through the heavy makeup. She was also a few pounds heavier than Maliha remembered. It gave her a perverse sense of satisfaction knowing that the years had been far kinder to her mother. The woman had always seemed pedestrian to Maliha compared to her mother’s far more artistic temperament. Sarah had once said she found it incomprehensible why anyone would choose a pack mule over a thoroughbred and Maliha had nodded in agreement. At the age of fourteen this show of solidarity had cemented their friendship even more. 

Her eighteenth birthday was one she wished she could permanently erase but it was one that was indelibly etched in her memory. The image of the turquoise dress she had been wearing, the smell of her mother’s perfume, her father’s blazer with the shiny gold buttons – all immortalised and captured in her mind. He had shown up at the party uninvited and had the nerve to bring his new wife with him. She wasn’t sure why her mother hadn’t objected. The reason she had given was that there was no point in creating a scene and he was after all her father. She had wanted to shake her mother. The man seemed to have a hold over her that Maliha didn’t understand. Was she the only person who could see him for what he was – a self-serving narcissist. 

Her friends had been enthralled by the stories of his flamboyant days as a student and it was galling to watch them giggle at his witty one-liners and fall for his easy charm. 

“Thankfully Maliha is a far prettier version of me – don’t you think? I mean can you imagine the poor girl with my nose!” she could hear ripples of laughter. 

“Don’t get me wrong – men should have prominent noses, gives them character,” he said pointing at his own and winking, “not little buttons on their face like that actor, what’s his name. Real men have real noses.” More laughter. 

She hated it when people told her she looked like her father – though the resemblance was undeniable. They had the same brown eyes and high cheekbones. He was a good looking man but that was of no comfort to her. 

Even Sarah had been taken in by him. 

“But you’re my best friend, you’re supposed to be on my side,” Maliha had recriminated. 

“I am. I promise I won’t laugh at his jokes next time or...or even speak to him.” Sarah had been contrite but the look of guilt on her face had been so comical, both of them had ended up laughing and hugging. There would be no Sarah at the wedding to give her moral support. 

What she hadn’t told Sarah or anyone for that matter was her father had taken her aside during the party. 

“I have a very special present for you, but it’s a secret so you can’t tell your mother yet, ok?” He had given her a conspiratorial wink and Maliha had wanted to tell him she was eighteen not eight. 

“What is it?” Part of her had been thrilled that he might actually have brought something special for her. Her excitement was short-lived as he had beckoned his new wife or rather his ex-secretary over. Her father was such a cliché. 

He put his arm around his wife and Maliha felt sick at the sight of the two of them. She looked quickly around to see if her mother had been privy to this show of affection. Thankfully she hadn’t. 

Her father had bent his head and said, “Sweetheart, in a few months you are going to be a big sister!” he smiled at her but he might as well have punched her in the stomach. The room felt as if it were closing in on her and for a moment she found it hard to breathe 

His wife had looked at her with a smile that suggested that once again Maliha and her mother had lost. She had turned around without a word and run into the bathroom. Her father had looked surprised as she fled. His face had been tinged with disappointment. Another image that was imprinted in her memory. 

She had been sent a picture of her ‘sister’ after the birth but Maliha had never met her or had ever wanted to get to know the girl. Her mother had tried to convince her to at least meet her half sibling but at the time Maliha had wanted nothing to do with any of them. In the picture he had sent, he was holding the baby close to his chest, smiling down at her. His face was full of love and tenderness. She had ripped it in two and thrown it in the bin. 

It was strange to think that the little girl sitting a few rows in front of her was the baby from the picture. She had never considered the girl as her sister only as a usurper. But here she was, sitting across from her – her own flesh and blood. She even had the same brown eyes and high cheek bones. Her sister was almost close enough for her to touch. 

Maliha reached over and took a rather battered looking leather wallet out of her bag. She opened the flap and unfolded the photograph that was stuck together with some tape. She held the picture of the man and the baby against her chest. Rayna, her name was Rayna. Then she carefully removed the tape binding the photograph and for the second time tore it up, only this time into little pieces. She sat back and closed her eyes. 