From: Roshan Nageena <roshan.nageena@gmail.com>
Date: 28 September 2016 at 13:37
Subject: SUBMISSION
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com
*ABOUT ME*: 

R Nageena likes to juggle the many roles in her life as Architect, Artist, Writer and Mom.  She loves to write and draw to express herself. She finds inspiration in nature and sets out seeking adventure with her three gregarious girls in the surrounding landscapes. Her work has been published in many design journals including Designer + Builder Magazine and Elite Life Magazine. 

*The Lost Tin Trunk* -By R Nageena 

*Glossary:* 

*Ikka: used in colloquial Malayalam to address male elders and means ‘brother’. * 

*Mundu: Towel* 

If I hadn’t been there I may  never have believed this story. So I don’t expect you to believe it either. But it’s a story I have to tell.   I’m trying to remember it as vividly as I can… it happened so long ago after all. It was in the small sleepy village of Mayazhi that I experienced the supernatural in the afterhours of that fateful day… 

“Son, Ismail wake up,” someone was frantically nudging me awake. 

I tried to rub the sleep out from my eyes. Shades of grey skimmed in front of me before I could recall where I was. The bullock cart jerked and I was thrown to the side. The cart stopped at a deserted clearing. We jumped onto the muddy road, Usman Haji and I. I was barely 8 years old at the time. Straight ahead of us lay in all its splendour the emerald green paddy fields filled to the brim with rain water. 

I was here to meet my maternal grandparents for the first time. 

“Is this the paddy field we have to cross?” I asked Usman Haji, my companion over the past few days. 

“No,” he guffawed. “It’s further down this road,” he said pointing to our left. That is when I noticed an overgrown pathway to our left so densely packed with shrubbery that it seemed like some secret trail. We squeezed through the foliage and came upon a muddy track. The ground was covered with moss and only here and there could I see some red earth peeking through, tenaciously holding on, and refusing to yield to mossy green fingers. A slow drizzle started falling upon us. 

Usman ikka noticed my hesitation. “Come on,” he urged me, “It’s a short cut. We will reach quickly,” as he heaved his obnoxious trunk carefully. 

I had wondered about this trunk from the beginning of our journey when Usman ikka got into the train at the Howrah Railway Station at Calcutta. What did this trunk contain? Could it be his clothes? He held onto it with all his might. No, surely they were not his sundry belongings. Usman ikka even slept with it in his embrace. I agonised over the contents of the trunk for a while but soon forgot about it. 

Presently I was starting to feel ravenously hungry. I complained to Usman ikka. 

“We would have missed the carriage had we stopped to eat,” he said apologetically. 

“Maybe you have something to eat in your trunk,” I countered as I eyed his trunk. We walked on trying to avoid puddles here and there. Thankfully it was not raining now. 

“No,” Usman Ikka looked nervously around him. “There’s no food in this.” 

The wind was starting to howl around us. Usman Ikka looked up at the sky fast gathering grey clouds in its wake to unleash its torrents down upon us, two lonely travellers on a deserted narrow road. I shuddered. Suddenly as the sky darkened there was a quick movement in front of us. A white hooded figure hurried past. 

“What was that?” I shouted and held onto Usman ikka. 

Usman ikka had seen it too. He looked shaken. 

“I don’t know,” he said anxiously. “Oh it’s just the wind playing tricks on us,” he added probably to comfort me. 

We walked slowly. That is when we saw it. The bright lights. 

Something bright was beckoning to us at the bend in the road. We rushed along and saw, to our surprise, what looked like a festival. 

“Looks like some carnival,” Usman ikka said joyously. “Your grandfather didn’t tell me there was a fair in town,” he exclaimed. 

I was pleased. In the dying rays of the setting sun we walked together through the carnival stopping at stalls on our way. Soon we sat down at a stall. I pointed to the piping hot steam cakes hungrily. Usman Ikka laughed his twinkling laugh and then asked the aged man behind the counter to give us two plates. Almost immediately the old man set two plates before us. We wolfed it down. Usman ikka ordered some more. As we ate Usman ikka started talking with the old man. 

Then it started pouring. I dozed off at the bench with the exhaustion of travel. When I woke up I could see Usman ikka and the old man immersed deep in conversation. I sat up and noticed that the stalls wore a deserted look. We still had to cross the waterlogged paddy fields. Usman ikka looked around him anxiously. His brows were furrowed and he seemed to be thinking hard. The old man sensed Usman Ikka’s unease. He asked him about it. 

Usman ikka pointed to the trunk at his feet. “I am worried about carrying this trunk across the fields. I have to cut across the fields and will be back tomorrow. Is there any place I can keep this for the night?” 

The old man smiled, “If you want you can keep it with me here. You may come to collect it from me tomorrow.” Usman Ikka hesitated. The rain pounding the sheets over our heads was deafening now. At long last Usman Ikka sighed and asked the old man to keep the trunk for him for just a day. 

The old man obliged. 

We waded through the paddy fields. The water rose up to my waist and then I understood why Usman Ikka did not want to carry the trunk across. We reached my Grandparents home by midnight. The two of them were waiting for us. Grandfather placed a mat in the entrance hall for Usman Ikka to sleep. Before long we were fast asleep. 

Early the next morning I woke up to hear Usman Ikka taking leave of Grandfather. He had business to do and had to collect his trunk on his way from the carnival, he said. 

“Carnival? Was there a carnival on your way here,” asked Grandfather, astonished. 

“Yes, of course! There’s a huge fair just across the field.” Usman Ikka said and recounted the carnival from the night before. 

“What nonsense! How can there be a carnival without me knowing about it.” Grandfather stoutly maintained. 

Usman ikka stood staring at Grandfather ashen faced. He then abruptly turned on his heels and began to run across the paddy field. Wrapping a white cotton *mundu* around my lower body I ran behind him as fast as my little legs could carry me. The water in the paddy fields had decreased. We splashed muddy water as we ran together. We came to the clearing of the night before where we had sat eating steamed cakes. 

Except now there was nothing there. The entire ground was empty. Not a trace of any activity from the night before. Grandfather came trundling down with a few villagers after a while.  They held sticks and pick axes. 

Usman Ikka knelt to the ground and cried. 

“All my life’s earnings…,” he wept. He looked around him and looked at his own hands in disbelief. The villagers stood around, their arms dangling beside them, their sticks and axes held down in submission to this poor man’s predicament. 

But they didn’t believe him. And they didn’t believe me either. Usman Ikka was carried home by 3 men and he spent the next few days on the mat in my Grandfather’s hall.  After that he walked the village for days trying to find some clue to his missing trunk. People said he was crazy. They blamed my Father for sending me with a deranged man. Then finally two weeks after we had reached, Usman Ikka took leave of Grandfather again. Grandfather embraced him and prayed for his quick recovery. Usman Ikka’s anguished eyes betrayed his annoyance. I didn’t want him to go so I ran behind him begging to accompany him till the paddy fields. 

It was then that a voice cried out behind us. “Hello…” gasped an old man hurrying up to catch up with us. “Are you the man who saw the carnival a fortnight back?” He asked Usman Ikka. 

Usman ikka responded “Why? Yes!” 

“I come from the village beside the river there,” and he pointed his finger across the river. “I heard the villagers talking about you. You are not mad. What you have seen is real!” he exclaimed. 

Usman Ikka looked up surprised, even hopeful. He eagerly asked the old man what he meant. 

“What you have seen, my good brother was a carnival of the Jinn. They come to these grounds only once a year. You will surely get your trunk back,” the wizened old man clasped his hands in glee. His excitement met with indifference. We didn’t quite comprehend what he was saying. 

Soon the three of us returned to Grandfather’s house. There the old man told us of the Carnival of the Jinn’s that takes place once a year. 

“You know the Jinn’s are beings just like us, except they are made out of fire,” he told us. 

“And on the night of the full moon when two of the brightest planets Venus and Jupiter can be seen on the western sky an assembly of Jinn are seen in that clearing near the paddy fields. The night you came was the night of the Carnival of the Jinn. I have been following this Carnival for years in the hope of seeing it and I was there near the fields that night. But when it started raining I found it difficult to cross the paddy fields and I fell on my way. By the time I had crossed they were gone” 

Usman ikka who had hung onto each word spoken by the withered old man now held his head in his hands. Every limb on his sturdy frame drooped with hopelessness. 

“You can retrieve your trunk,” the old man continued looking at Usman Ikka, “if”, and he gestured theatrically to the sky, “you go back there exactly a year later.” 

All of us watched the old man as he sat lost in thought, silent spectators on the brink of belief. At long last he said to Usman ikka, “Come back here on the 30th of June next year. I will come with you to help retrieve your trunk,” so saying he abruptly got up and was gone. 

Grandfather and I were sworn into secrecy. We were not to utter a word of this to anyone.  Usman Ikka went back to Calcutta the next day. 

A year later… 

We were back at our village near the Mayazhi River. 

On the night of the full moon when our eyes could clearly discern the two brightest planets Venus and Jupiter a finger’s space away from one another on the western sky we set out together. My Grandfather, the old scholar, Usman Ikka and I. We crossed the paddy fields in single file. We didn’t want to make too much noise and drive the Jinn away.  As we walked towards the clearing Usman Ikka and I looked at each other. The lights were there just as the day we had arrived at Mayazhi a year back. Soon we were in front of the bright lights of a carnival in full swing. We walked inside slowly so as not to attract any attention. We went to the last stall where we had eaten earlier. 

“I have come for my trunk,” Usman ikka told the old man at the counter, in a quivering voice. 

In a lightning of a second the old man had the trunk in front of Usman Ikka. He tried to make conversation with Usman Ikka but he was too overwhelmed to talk. My Grandfather thanked the old man profusely and we walked away dazed from the bright lights and retraced the path we had taken. As we made our way towards the fields we noticed something amiss. The old scholar who had accompanied us was not with us. We returned to the carnival in search of him. But we didn’t find him and none of us ever saw him or such a carnival ever again. 

The End 