From: narayani das <das.narayani@gmail.com>
Date: 16 October 2016 at 19:31
Subject: submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com


Bio: I am a Graphic Designer and also a passionate reader. 

*The Little Girl* 

Archana is giving the final touches to her painting – a face of an unmasked clown drawn juxtaposed to his smiling mask. The abstract vibrant and cheerful background in the painting seems completely unaware of the clown’s grief and slow depression that renders him hollow within. After the last color strokes to the eyes, she lets out a sigh of deep satisfaction. Not that the painting has come out as well as she had expected but it was after a long hiatus that she has been actually able to complete one. The easel stands near a huge glass window in her tiny studio. Behind it lie her work, neatly labeled and standing against the wall – some ready, some unfinished and yet some more discarded. She moves back to have a view of her piece of art and savour the moment. She intended to bring out melancholy in the clown’s expression but somehow on closer scrutiny she seems to have failed. Perhaps she is just overthinking. Or exhausted and needs a break. 

She runs her eye over her to-do-list for the day. She has to pick up a few things from the market before she makes the dinner ready. Since morning she has been listless and anxious apart from the time she was immersed in her painting. Mindless thoughts have been lingering in the back of her mind like ripples in water from incessantly pouring rain drops. A ripple fades away into nothingness but her each thought left a deep imprint, that aggregated. She can’t seem to put a finger on the source of it. She was looking forward for Raghu, her husband to arrive home after a long business trip. Perhaps it was the grim weather outside. Or was it the painting? Anyway she fetches the car keys and sets off for the *Kirana* store, where she usually visits for her emergency purchases. 

The shop owner greets her enthusiastically and tries to strike up a conversation with her. Normally she enjoys the small talk with him about his profit, sales, the weather and so on. But today she excuses herself curtly after buying the essentials. She takes the cemented path to the parking area to avoid the puddles created from the downpour since morning. Today the other shops seem to have closed earlier than usual. The seemingly deserted path is dimly illuminated. She just about avoids stumbling on a stray dog resting. She is fumbling for the car keys in her handbag when a hand touches her elbow from the back sending a chill down her spine. She drops her bag in the shock. An array of coins and the keys spill out making an endless tinkle that resounds in the surrounding silence. She bends to grab the keys and a tiny little figure comes to her notice busy salvaging the coins - a little girl drenched totally from head to toe, faintly shivering. She immediately averts her eyes since her experience with strangers has taught her to be prudent, to look with the lenses of suspicion and distrust in such situations.  The girl clumsily gathers a few and as extends her hand forward, a fistful for her small size. Archana asks her to keep them. But the girl insists. That is when Archana looks at the eyes, large black eyes with smudged kohl, the smear running down her cheeks. They are sorrowful yet determined and exude immense pride. Archana proceeds to ask her what she was doing there in the dark and that too unaccompanied - the girl doesn’t reply.  Evidently she needed something since she had initiated the interaction with the touch. Tears appear to well up in those eyes. Few more minutes of prodding brings incomprehensible words tumbling out of her with an outburst of suppressed emotions.  What Archana can grasp is that she had come to the Delhi with her *chacha *who had said would be back after attending to few errands but hasn’t come back. 

She ran the options she had in her mind. Leaving the girl stranded there was definitely not one of them. CR Park police station was 10 minutes away. She could drop her there in the officers’ charge. But before that the girl needed a change to dry clothes. Archana anticipated resistance from her to the proposal. She would have apprehensions about going with a stranger. But to her surprise, she agreed readily and seemed quite comforted with the thought. As soon as they reached home, she made the girl comfortable, switched on a cartoon channel on TV and went to the store to search for some of Rohan’s old clothes which she had planned to keep till eternity. She chose a bright yellow T-shirt and shorts assuming it to be the right fit for the girl. She could still remember vividly Rohan running into her arms in them. How time flies, she sighs. Shrill peals of laughter from the living room bring her to the present from her stupor of nostalgia. She smiles. Children…one moment they can be totally frightened…the next, they could be laughing. It can take as little as a few funny lines to be uttered by their favorite cartoon characters. 

As she enters the room, the girl is about to break into another chain of laughs. The girl gets conscious and stops herself. Yet again in an attempt to break the ice, Archana enquires ‘what did Doraemon say so funny? I like him too’. And it was not altogether a lie. She still enjoys catching a glimpse of the episodes in between surfing channels just to relive Rohan’s childhood moments. And that query certainly helped. The girl goes on explaining the scene in broken sentences. Archana hands her the clothes and in the meantime goes to fix her something to eat. She quickly fries a frozen *tikki* and makes a burger. She still stacks up her freezer with them even though Rohan, when he comes during his holidays prefers healthier options. The girl looks fresh now and she is most delighted to see the burger being brought and finishes it off in minutes. There’s mirth and a twinkle in her eyes which couldn’t be missed. She goes on and talks about her younger sibling’s antics and how she takes care of him while her mother is away at work. A bit of maturity and wisdom beyond her years in those twinkling eyes was clearly evident. 

Their chatter which seems now unending is broken only by a message from Raghu that his flight landed earlier than expected and he was five minutes away from home. He also mentioned he was exhausted and will immediately retire to bed once he reaches. As far as she knew Raghu, he wouldn’t approve her bringing over the girl. And Archana didn’t want her to give him any further stress at that moment. She shows the girl Rohan’s room and asks her to rest there till she finishes some pending tasks. ‘We will soon head to the police station and ask them to look for your *chacha*’, she says to the girl. Her eyes light up for a moment and then are sad. ‘Will you stay with me there till they find him?’, the girl asks pleadingly. Just as she reassures her that she would, the doorbell rings. 

She decided that once Raghu is off to bed, she will do as she has planned without giving him any hint. She attends to Raghu and soon he is off to bed. She quietly goes to check on the girl and finds her in deep slumber. She smiles at her recollection of checking up on Rohan at nights when he was a child. She could hear her little snores and found it reassuring. She didn’t have the heart to disturb her sleep. She adjusts her blanket and thinks about delaying the trip till early morning. Perhaps before Raghu wakes up. 

When she lies down on her sofa, she feels no more restless. Peace and calm have replaced her restiveness even though an arduous task still lies ahead the next morning. She thinks of going back to her painting but decides not to and picks a book.  She doesn’t know when she fell asleep on the sofa. She is woken by a call from the guard room. She instinctively runs to answer but finds Raghu reaching for it. She can hear him ask the guard,’ What *Chacha* and which *Bachchi*? There must be some misunderstanding. Ask him to come tomorrow morning ’. Archana intervenes gesticulating fiercely and urging him to listen to her. He wearily muffles the receiver with his hand and listens patiently to her as she summarizes her predicament that made her give shelter to the girl. He is appalled but in a restrained voice tells the guard to send the person in. As he goes to get the door, Archana rushes to the girl. As she gently wakes the girl up, she can hear a loud altercation in the corridor. She can hear the words …kidnapping…arrest. The girl instantly shouts and wails, `*Chacha*’ and before Archana realizes runs to the corridor. Archana follows her. Amidst her wails, Archana can hear her saying pointing to her, `She forcibly got me here’. Archana feels dazed for a moment. The person adds, `I will ensure you face the consequences for this crime …thankfully the boys witnessed you luring my niece at the parking area’. Archana recovers and firmly tells him to go ahead and this agitates the person even further. Raghu signals Archana to refrain and tries calmly to placate him, ‘What do you want?’ To which he says this is a legal matter and Raghu cuts him short, `How much?’ While they leave, those eyes that radiated not so long ago only innocence have betrayal written all over. 

She knows she won’t get any sleep, so she goes to the studio. As she switches the lights on, the painting stares at her. The face of the clown seems to be smirking and laughing at her. The worms of deceit have hollowed it out.’ One more to the stack of discarded paintings’, she says to herself. 