From: Khushboo Shah <khushbooshah219@gmail.com>
Date: 18 October 2016 at 01:48
Subject: Submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Biographical Sketch: 

Khushboo Shah is an 18 year young storyteller. She’s bohemian by thought and pragmatic by action. She also loves long drives and hot meals cooked at home. She has been published in international magazines such as Textploit and also writes frequently on her blog, where she also loves to experiment with her artistic skills. 

*Shaded Secrets* 

He confessed to me one day, “I liked someone else when I was young, you know?” I sat there stunned. Listlessly, he turned the newspaper as I stared at him, my father. I wondered if he was going to narrate a tale of adulterous mischief.  It is such a preconceived notion that in one’s manhood, a man needs advice on sustaining or avoiding infidelity. I do not appreciate anyone governing my growth. Yet, mother’s smiling face catches me off guard. Her smile always creates confusion for me. Her assured calmness always, raising oddity in me. But I stayed quiet and watched him continue. I remember mother in the early years. A *dupatta* over her head, a docile smile always fit on her jaw like plaque. She still wore those chiffon *sarees*, but there was a different, almost compelling confidence about her now. She glowed. 

He sips tea and says, “She always arrived before the morning sun. She always came to pick shells from the shore. Her stature, her position was always like she was gazing towards the north, her stance welcomed winds from the East. The palm trees always so light and breezy in the morning . . .” His wistful nature surprised me. I couldn’t believe that after 23 years of formal exchanges and simple greetings, I was witnessing the nostalgic man in my uptight white-collar father.  “I hoped she would gaze towards her left and talk to me.” I imagined my father on some lazy beach. The morning cool and bright: a stark contrast to the smothering rain and gloomy weather outside our window. I could even smell the salty beach air. Would he have worn shorts? Trunks, perhaps. I dare not ask. Such illegitimate scenes didn’t deserve to be on my mind. Yet, I smiled out of sheer jubilance. Imagining my father, a teenage version of me and a child of the 1970’s, set off a different kind of inquisitiveness in me. 

Usually, I loved the days wherein he wouldn’t initiate any conversations. But today, I dared to speak more. “Did she ever know you were there?” I asked, hoping that the reply would be negative. Though curious, I really didn’t want an illicit sibling. 

“Oh, no. She was young and fascinating. I was just a boy of ten.” 

“Oh?” 

“Oh.” 

“I’m surprised to see you both talking.” Mother taunted. After years of mediating between father and son, and apologizing for things that weren’t ever in her control, she seemed satisfied with today’s events. Perhaps, she was even almost happy with the change.  Father handed her a toast and replied, “Well, I need him to understand the mystical nature of women. They look serene, but are filled with rage. Despite their docility, some conquer.” He then turned to me, “Some, like your mother felt weak; I’ve underestimated her power.” 

“Why are you telling me this?” I projected exasperation, but instead I was fearful and guilty. I felt that he knew something that I didn’t. 

“Because of this” He placed an upside down Polaroid snapshot on the table. The lipstick stain of a raspy kiss had smudged some numbers. 

“You should call her before they smudge more. Readable things are better than something unidentifiable.” 

“I thought you’d add some deep message to the story.” I speak cautiously. I place the snapshot in the palm of my hands and turned it, so the red stamp of her lust wouldn’t embarrass me further. I flush. Mother’s raises an eyebrow at my clandestine blush. Everything feels redder all of a sudden. I didn’t need father to give me a sex talk. Mother understood, she laughed, “I think she’d look good on your arm for those parties you go for.” 

“Clubbing you mean?” Father winked at her again. After spending my whole life in reverence and fear of my father, witnessing them open handedly flirt with each other made me turn to a deeper shade of red. I believe I looked vermillion. What I expected to be a normal day was taking so many twists and turns. Damn. I shouldn’t have forgotten her picture in my pants. 

“You both seem to like her.” I state. 

“I fancy her boldness.” His comment makes me smirk. 

“Sure dad.” In the flick of just one breakfast, I’ve gone from ‘father’ to ‘dad’. 

“Responsibilities are tiring, son.” He remarks. I raise an eyebrow for like always I sense that parental tone and I don’t know what to say. “One day, you’ll grow up and all of this will just be a fond memory. You think you’re 23 and adult, but honestly, life’s just started. Don’t be so scared to try something new.” 

“I’m not scared.” I protest. He knows differently, “If you weren’t scared, you wouldn’t have forgotten her picture. You’re timid.” I am angry, yet I feel like he knows exactly how I feel. Maybe he’s blending my present with his past. Maybe I need to fulfill something which he can’t and wouldn’t. I clutch the Polaroid tighter.  I stare at mom. She has a kindly smile on her face. I am still contemplating whether my father – someone who never appreciates me, someone who always wants me to push further, a person who I call the ‘*ruiner* of all things’ . . . is actually “nice?” Or maybe, something more intense like: *‘he actually loves my mom.’* 

“Don’t be like me son. I’m the timid one here.” He holds mom’s hand. It’s such a compassionate moment but so much changed in just that one moment. I look into his eyes. I see relief. But I also see a relief that has come after so much fear and so much regret. A kind of regret that comes only after guilt; a kind of regret which I didn’t need. I don’t ask him what happened back then. I don’t know the story of how my parents met. But what I do know is that regretful humans are a whole different species. I step back from the table. The picture is all crumpled in my palms now, the lipstick marks like a blusher on my sweaty plams. As I’m putting the chair back in, I off-handedly look at them again. Mother’s reading the paper now and dad’s still drinking tea. I slyly take a look at the picture again. Her bikini contrasts my mother’s sober *saree*. 

“Before you go, tell me – what is she like?” mother asks. I’m vulnerable. I hope she doesn’t know what I’m thinking. Yet, I think, I wonder and I inscribe her for my parents. This is what she would feel like to them for the rest of their life, or at least, for the rest of her time in my life. 

“She’s like a secret.” 

“An exposed secret, you mean?” Mother jokes. Her laugh even brings me to smile, though I’m uncertain about my feelings. 

“She’s complex?” Father asks curiously. It’s really funny how he is so into me today morning. I look around the white walls of our home. Suddenly, the rains outside made everything smell so fresh, so new and so untouched. Everything feels like a gift. A gift box of chocolate perhaps: a box which I know will delight me. 

“She’s an assortment.” I smirk. I leave my epiphany to my own thoughts. 

“Of desire?” Father asks. 

“Of secrets.” I wink. He smiles. Our gestures have buried our secrets and the other, will never need to know. 