From: sreehari nair <sreeharin@rediff-inc.com>
Date: 21 October 2016 at 11:35
Subject: Re: Naseeruddin Shah likes his Ale Bitter - The Pitch & the Piece

*Naseeruddin Shah likes his Ale bitter* 

Naseeruddin Shah snorted when I told him I spell my name with two Es as opposed to one ‘I.’  “Anyway,” he said, and gave me a three quarter handshake, just before an enthusiastic, bucktoothed girl with curly hair, interrupted us. 

“Aren’t you Naseeruddin Shah, the actor?” 

Naseeruddin Shah snorted again. 

“Of course, you are,” she asserted to herself. “I have to confess, I am *not* a fan of yours. But I admire you a lot more than all those actors, of whom I am actually a fan. Them, I love; You, I admire.” 

“It’s always great to meet someone who is not a fan of you,” Naseeruddin Shah replied, smiling slightly, and adjusting his shirt’s left collar. “Hi, I am Padma Bhushan Naseeruddin Shah on this sunny afternoon, here in Lower Parel.” 

“Hi, I am Shivani Singhi. Is that your son?” she asked, pointing in my general direction. 

“Oh no,” Naseer said, “He’s just someone who spells his name with two Es.” 

Shivani Singhi looked at Naseer for five seconds, and then at me. “On an unrelated note,” she said, “Want to warn you right off the bat that I suffer from Tourette’s syndrome. So if I break into a swearing-fit, right in the middle of a sentence, please do excuse me...*you Brinjal-Head of a Man!*” 

Naseer leant back slightly, hit hard by the last digression, but still smiling. “Tourette’s? So you *just swear* when you *have to swear*? Sounds like a privilege.” 

“Yes, I can’t seem to control it. Used to blurt out the choicest expletives. But I have been undergoing therapy for about a year now, and that has helped me substitute the truly offensive swear words with names of popular vegetables,” she said, before suddenly contorting her face, closing her eyes and shouting out loud, “*You both have such Cabbage-like faces, and you smell like two Radishes, you Tomato suckers, you*.” 

“Good grief!” Naseer exclaimed, “You are amazing!” 

“No, I am not. I just got fired from two jobs in the last four months, owing to this problem” Shivani replied, her eyes glistening slightly. 

“Look, I have no dog in your fight, but I am genuinely moved by your condition and the condition of those like you,” Naseeruddin Shah said, sounding sufficiently sympathetic. 

“Yes, well, we are a marginalized lot. Did you know that Microsoft Word doesn’t even recognise the word Tourette?” 

“Really?” both Naseer and I asked in conjunction. 

“Yes. I mean, that’s the one way Leprosy patients are far better off than us Tourette’s patients. Their condition is at least Microsoft Word-approved,” said Shivani, before her spasms reappeared and she bellowed: *Nawaz Sharif fed my mother, his old bottle gourd*. After de-contorting herself, she continued, “Guess I shouldn’t embarrass myself anymore, and just leave.” 

“You take care,” Naseer replied, this time offering a full handshake, and following the trajectory of Shivani’s tear as it travelled from her left eye, landed on the bridge of her nose, moved down her left cheek, and finally settled on her blue sweater. 

Shivani drew her hand back, and hurried off the pavement. Naseer saw her fade away and turned to me, “Man, isn’t she something?” 

I looked back at him, kind of puzzled. 

“Don’t you like women with tics about them? I believe that to really love a woman, you ought to find something imperfect in her first,” Naseer theorised. 

“Well, I surely like women who reveal their gums when they smile,” I went along. 

“See? Isn’t that oddly cute?” said Naseer, before pushing at *Hushies’ *front door*, *and motioning me in. 

*Hushies, *where Naseeruddin Shah had agreed to meet me for an interview last week*, *is a saloon on the ground floor of an old tenement on the Sitaram Jadhav Marg in Lower Parel, almost equidistant from Urmi Estate and the True School of Music. It opened in 1996, and is owned by a Parsi by the name of Rustomjee Readymoney. Rustomjee’s relatives have in the past dabbled in opium trade, though Rustom himself is strictly opposed to drugs of any kind. His major and only distraction is Ale, which his saloon serves by the Pewter Mugfuls. Amid the sound of passing vehicles and their incessant honking, *Hushies* often opens out to the loud mooing of a cow, which roams the entire stretch of Sitaram Jadhav Marg, and comes to rest on the pavement just outside the saloon. Because she roams so much, Rustom has named the cow ‘Roamila,’ and he feeds her grass and legumes that he personally buys from an 80 year-old man, who sits outside the Lower Parel station. Roamila moos all day and sometimes all night, and her crying is the last thing that visitors to *Hushies* hear before they close the door of the saloon behind them. 

Once inside *Hushies*, surrounded by its cobwebby ceiling - on which gas lamps throw shadows - you almost lose your sense of sound. For *Hushies* is Mumbai’s only ‘Silent Saloon’; with nothing except muffled voices and half-smiles to greet you inside. The saloon is lined with 15 sets of two rubber cushion-fitted chairs, and between each set of two chairs is positioned a rectangular wicker table. At *Hushies*, people have to lean over their wicker tables and strain their ears to make sense of what those sitting at chairs opposite to them are saying. Eavesdropping on conversations is not prohibited, but it yields no palpable pleasure. The entire place works like a hangout for Mossad agents. Waiters at *Hushies* are either trained mime artists or sign language experts. Besides two shakers for salt and pepper, on each table is kept a black-coloured Sound Level Meter. 

“The purpose of this Sound Level Meter,” Naseer explained to me, as we were sitting down, “is to keep *Hushies *noise-free.” 

Turns out that as soon as the readings on any of the Sound Level Meters go above 80 Db, Rustomjee proceeds to personally lead the shouting offenders by their elbows, head them toward the door, and tell them politely, “Sir/Madam, please make haste and leave the premises or I’ll be obliged to forget that you are our customers.” 

“Do you, yourself, have an aversion for sound?” I asked Naseer. 

“I won’t go as far as that,” he said. “But I guess there’s a part of me that can live in Quiet. This place nourishes that part.” 

Naseer observed that my eyes were constantly scanning the Sound Level Meter to check if we were overstepping the prescribed limits. He waved at me. ”Stop thinking about it and you will be fine. At any rate, some amount of silence is ideal for a country that’s all out to regulate what people should think and say.” 

The last sentence was my cue to asking Naseer about the situation that his good friend Om Puri found himself in. For even as we were talking, deliberations were on, about filing an FIR against Puri for insulting Indian soldiers on a TV Show. 

Naseer thought about the question for a moment, his nostrils flared, and he laughed a little, before a waiter arrived at our table and coughed faintly, seeking our attention. Naseer promptly held the menu out to the waiter, and he pointed to Apple Cider Ale, while I tapped at Oatmeal Stout. The waiter smiled, did a little bow and left. 

“What opinion can I have about Om’s situation?” Naseer continued. 

I reminded him about a similar position that he had found himself in, a couple of years ago; the major national grouse back then, being his reference to Pakistanis as ‘big-hearted.’ “Did you receive any threatening calls?” I asked curiously. 

“Oh yes,” Naseer replied, “But truth be told, I am more scared of those *Sholay*-fanatics publicly executing me for calling *Sholay* a mediocre movie, than I am of political goons causing me any harm for my Pakistan-specific statements.” 

We laughed at the last bit together. Naseer loves it when people discover a sense of truth in the absurd statements he makes. It makes his eyes glint, his lower jaw twist, and his upper body shake vigorously, before he collapses on his chair. Of course, he did all of that in utter silence that day. Naseer also uses his hands extremely well while making points, often using them to draw full and half circles in the air; he feels his beard or touches his glasses when crafting an argument; and gives you a perceptible pause before every comma. 

Naseeruddin Shah also made three trips to the urinal, in the entire one hour that we were talking. After one of those trips, he came back excitedly with an anecdote, “Talking about Om, there’s something I missed mentioning in my memoir. Om and I actually bonded over our many joint alfresco urinating sessions at Perry Cross Road, just outside my present building. Remember how Stephen Dedalus and Leopold Bloom bonded in *Ulysses, *when they went peeing together in Molly’s garden? I guess, like Dedalus and Bloom, we’re also two artists who’re disillusioned about the system, but powerless in the matter of changing it. But yes, those peeing sessions - during which we would aim at a rock that stood at a fair distance - were probably the only instances when Om and I competed with each other. I think we were working out our juices. Some Sunday afternoons, when I am just lazing around, I can still feel some of those old ammonia vapours floating up to my apartment at Sand Pebbles on Perry Cross Road.” 

Since the last revelation came about without any prodding, I realised why Naseer had strictly advised me against using a preset interview format when fixing a date with him, about a month ago. “You can do the interview provided there’s none of the usual Q&A bullshit. I don’t like talking to a tape-recorder or sitting there repeating my last statement while a reporter jots it down like pearls in a notebook,” he had told me over the phone. “Let’s have a conversation, and you can later type the whole thing up from memory. Go for the Capital T Truth than a factual recreation of everything I say. Invent things if you want to. God knows, I am not litigious!” 

Back at our table, the waiter arrived with our Pewter Mugs, and he placed them in front of us, doing another bow before he took leave. Naseer didn’t pick up his Mug immediately, and wanted to state an observation he had made. “That waiter has the face of a Deer; noticed?” I replied in negative. “It always gets me interested when human beings have features like animals, or when animals look like humans. I see so many dogs these days that look exactly like their owners. Cheers to that!” he said, raising his Pewter Mug. 

While my first sip went down great, Naseer’s didn’t. He got up from our table and demanded Rustomjee’s attention by lifting his index finger. Rustom arrived in no time and Naseer asked him with zero indignation, and stirring his Mug, “Damn, this is so sweet, Rustom. What is this, Squash?” Rustom scribbled something on a piece of paper that he pulled out from his breast-pocket, and put it down on our table. It read: “People like their Apple Ciders sweet. You should have known before ordering.” 

Naseer took the sheet, borrowed Rustom’s pen and scribbled back in big slants as I watched: “If I wanted something sweet, I would have watched a movie. To invert a George Orwell theory, “Ale is meant to be bitter, like Tea is meant to be bitter.”” 

He passed the pen and the sheet of paper to Rustom, who scribbled away in round font, “Try our English Bitter, then. If bitter is your taste, you can’t go wrong with that.” Naseer read the last note, flashed a thumbs-up sign, and replied in a hushed voice, “*Te Salut*, for that suggestion.” 

After his drink was replaced, Naseer took two quick swigs and let the pungency warm his tongue. “I wouldn’t have come to these fancy places, and got into arguments like that last one, if I didn’t have the big change to spend.” 

At this point, I asked him about his general crossness for money. Naseer took two more quick swigs of his English Bitter, wiped the froth off his lips with his shirtsleeve and said, “I genuinely believe that money is a corrupting factor. And I am not even the first one to say this; Jesus Christ has talked about it. See, I don’t have a problem with a man selling his acting skills to pay his bills, or put a roof above his head. But doing a movie for the sole purpose of purchasing your 15th Chalet in Lonavla is a bit too vulgar, isn’t it?” 

“Naseer, do you think of yourself as a leftist?” “Oh no.” 

“An existentialist?” To that, there was a violent shake of the head. 

“A solipsist?” By this point, all reactions from Naseer had stopped manifesting. 

“A non-conformist?” Nothing. 

“A controversialist?” *Niente*. 

“I am none of those ‘ists’,” said Naseer breaking into my spree, “Not even an acupuncturist.” 

“I guess the problem with fixing your image as a certain someone is that it creates this false impression in your mind that you are a part of some group or revolution. If you are into social taxonomies, you would know that the Granola Cruncher type is not really a post-millennial or a post 90s thing; that type has always existed. But when you box yourself into a type like that, you feel like you are creating a new cultural order. It may put you in a good mood for some time, but trust me, the solidarity wears off fast. That’s what happened to the Parallel Cinema movement in Hindi movies. Experience has taught me that it’s only when you walk alone, that you discover new horizons.” 

“Do you even think of yourself as a part of the acting community then?” 

“That’s the point,” said Naseer. “I am not even sure if I am an actor. I act for a living, maybe. I act for the *public - *for lack of a better term. But you know *what I really think* is my greatest-ever acting performance?” 

At this point, a series of underappreciated Naseeruddin Shah Performances glided through my memory - the corrupt policeman in *Maqbool*; the industrialist in *Monsoon Wedding* - as Lalit Verma he conveys such flaming sincerity that you wouldn’t know whether to take him straight; and the inward-growing colonial landlord in the Malayalam film *Ponthan Mada. *My friends know I am a Naseeruddin Shah nut. God damn it, I am that guy who had gone for a show of his 2011 caper *Chaalis Chauraasi* that had as its audience, just me and   three Nepal-born Chinese cooks. I am that guy! Nobody - not even Naseeruddin Shah - had the right to test my knowledge of obscure Naseeruddin Shah Performances. And yet, I played the good interviewer that day and let Naseer answer his own question. 

“You see, a young Indian filmmaker, based out of USA, wanted to make a Mockumentary, with me as its subject. The idea was to follow me for one week, as I went about my life, and then stitch together a movie-length feature comprising the most interesting passages. We were planning to do the whole thing in gonzo fashion; improvise and take chances. I liked the idea, and so we went ahead with the shoot. But it soon hit me that I had real difficulty in being me, while facing the camera. I felt empty. It was easy to reach out to your inner depths when you are playing a character. But being me, and being an interesting version of me, was so tough.” 

“So I started to lie in front of the camera; lying as Naseeruddin Shah. I told the camera about how Ratna, my wife, loves it when I bitch about my female colleagues. I invented a confessional bit where I revealed how the real Naseeruddin Shah was killed in a road accident in 1977, and how, I, a lookalike, have been playing him in real life, all these years. I told the camera, that I wanted to die abruptly one day, after addressing my suicide note to my pet parrot.” 

As the long monologue unravelled bit by bit, I kept staring at Naseer to check if it was the second round of Ale doing its magic. But it wasn’t; Naseer was still very eloquent and very, very serious. The wrinkles on his forehead had multiplied. 

“I regard that unreleased Mockumentary as perhaps my greatest performance yet; primarily because it was so born out of my greatest fear - that I wasn’t interesting enough as a person. I was me, and yet not me. That small experience also told me that perhaps I am a much better actor in real life; something, which, if you ask me, is also true of most actors.” 

I asked Naseer if he was ever himself, at least in interviews. He thought about the question for a minute before replying, “*I am*, for most part, except when I have to relay across some message or say something life-affirming to the audience. It’s then that I am left stumped. My self-help tip would help no one. To give you an example, when I am too tense, I sing to myself a song I learned in school and it goes, ‘Glow little Glowworm, glisten, glisten.’ I sing the song to myself, and it rejuvenates me instantly.” 

“Now you tell me, my little Glowworm,” Naseer continued, pointing sharply at me and squinting heavily,” You think I can pass off that kind of personal relaxing strategy, as advice, on an interview? So I give them the regular platitudes and it makes everyone happy.” 

By then, the staff at *Hushies *had put on a silent orchestra for those at the Saloon. A few waiters gathered around, doing pantomimes of keyboard-playing, guitar-strumming, and drum-beating. Rustom himself took to the main stage, and sang nothing particular into his microphone, but emoting heavily. Two waiters did a neat little Pas de deux, making perfect sense of Rustom’s exaggerated lip movements and gesturing. 

Naseeruddin Shah was watching the entire show with great interest, moving his hand rhythmically to a tune that was playing in his head. He seemed like he was enjoying the act, but stopped suddenly, and said to me, “Freak-Show, right?” I smiled, and so he persisted, “To link this to a question you’d asked sometime back, that’s what we actors are too - all Freaks, all in pursuit of a common ideal: Money.” 

