Sort of obvious, and a little excessively descriptive but has a good, old-fashioned story-telling aspect to it. 

Thoughts? 

From: Vidya Panicker <vidya.s.panicker@gmail.com>
Date: 23 March 2016 at 09:56
Subject: Submission
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>
I would like to make a short story submission towards your journal. 

The author bio and contact details are shared below: 

Based in the God's own country of Kerala, Vidya’s stories have appeared in  Himal South Asian, The Fem Literary Magazine, Animal literary magazine, Muse India, The Bombay review, Munyori Literary Journal, efiction India and others. 

She may be contacted at: 

Guest house 3, Room no: 3, Indian Institute of Management Kunnamangalam PO Kozhikode, Kerala, India Pin: 673570 

PFB the story: 

*The hands that killed the tahsildar* 

Lying on a nondescript bed, almost two hours before she would die, Subhadra thinks about the tahsildar and the hands which killed him 52 years ago. She was the only witness to the incident that shook the village, where until then people confidently slept on the verandahs, and treated the custom of closing windows and doors of their houses as a fashionable unnecessity of the new generation. Tahsildar’s death changed the village, it changed Subhadra more, because the man who was killed in the confines of a closed room by a pair of hands that stretched across an open window, was her husband. 

Subhadra remembers the smell of fish inside their house on that day of tahsildar’s death which also marked the end of summer and beginning of monsoons. Early in the humid, dark morning, as a part of the annual cleaning, the large pond in front of their house was prepared to be emptied by the servants who carried away water in large buckets. Her own five children, 3 boys and 2 girls joined along, wallowing in the slimy mud like gleeful pigs. She checked on them throughout the day, assessing how the fishes were coming along. Giant cat fishes and braals were dragged outside the pond to the surface, where they lay still and pretended to be dead for hours, before actually dying without as much as a twitch. Trust the fresh water fishes to make death look sober and calm, unlike those sardines and mackerels that raised a ruckus in their final moments.  By noon, the pond was clean and empty, but moistening again from the persistent source spring. It would be full by the next day morning. 

The servants left with their share of fishes, which they would preserve throughout the year, dried and pickled. Soon, smoke from the fire and dung stoves started rising from the servant’s quarters a kilometer away, and filled the air with a pungent odor. It unsettled the children, the eldest 16 and the youngest 3 who started eyeing the bounty on the yard with gluttonous eyes, Subhadra left to the kitchen and returned with a *muram* full of freshly peeled shallots, garlic, ginger and fiery red birds’ eye chilies and prepared her makeshift stove near the pond. While the Hindu household enjoyed its occasional share of fish and fowl, she would never stoop low to prepare it in the kitchen inside, and allowing the smell of fishes to waft along to the pooja room and other nooks and crannies of the house, where the odor would stay for weeks. On a grinding stone, with the cylindrical crusher, she crushed and ground the spices into a thick paste, applying it on the disemboweled fishes and frying it in fresh coconut oil on the stove. The children sniffed hungrily, grabbed the still hot, crispy pieces from a banana leaf and ate and ate long in to the evening. As the sun began to set, Subhadra advised her maid to light that lamp for the Gods for the day, because she was smelling too much of fish, and when she seated her scrubbed and cleaned children in front of the lamp to recite the names of Lord Rama and Krishna and Kali, they burped large burps that smelled of dead fishes and fermented garlic. 

No one spoke of dinner that night, being stuffed to their throats with the feast from the pond, but still a small pot of rice boiled in the kitchen, for the man of the house who was yet to reach, though he rarely came home and barely ever ate from there. His staple of tapioca and fish or chicken or beef was served to him alongside large bottles of arrack or toddy in the toddy shop a few kilometers away every day. It was over this divine combination of an average village man, that the tahsildar by day, and drunkard by evening, Govindan Pillai, signed away most of the coconut groves, paddy fields and houses in his name to newly-made friends of a day or a week. On other days, when he visited one of his mistresses across the river or in the colony of the lower castes, he reappeared at home without his gold chain or a diamond crusted ring or the thick golden bangle on his wrist. 

On the day he would die, after he exhausted all the culinary and alcoholic options inside the dirty toddy shop, Govindan slowly hoisted himself up from the creaking bench inside the shop and contemplated whether to visit his favorite mistress in the colony or go to his wretched house with a nosy woman and noisy children. On an impulse that often laces stories of death, he chose the latter. 

“Father is coming”, shouted the elder son, Damodaran, who was still in front of the lamp, eyeing the horizon intermittently, when the distant glow of a torch of dried coconut leaves appeared at a distance that marked the border of their paddy field. Damodaran, along with Madhu, his brother, hurried down and took their place near the ridge. The youngest two ran inside and scuffled and hid their faces on the pillows on their mattress. The eldest of the girls rushed to the kitchen and started scrubbing clean pots. Out of habit, Subhadra began muttering verses from *Lalita Sahasranamam*, the thousand names of Goddess, sometimes missing few or several verses along. 

After about 5 minutes, which were punctuated by the shrieks of cicadas, and their own anticipated breaths, the light from the torch went off with a plop. 

“Father has fallen”, Damodaran shouted to his brother, and both of them ran across the ridge to the stream, inside which their father now lay, almost as pig like as his children in the morning. They dragged him out and staggered with him to their house, keenly listening to the abuses he was showering on the two of them. For the teenagers, their father was the main source of such manly words, which they abundantly threw at their friends who were not blessed with foul mouthed fathers as they were. 

As her husband was dragged to the verandah, Subhadra rolled over and over again on her tongue, one among the thousand names of the Goddess, a name she could later try to recall and would not succeed, and patiently waited. Damodaran and Madhu disappeared behind the cow shed and waited. The younger children raised their heads from the pillow, strained their ears and waited. The girl in kitchen stopped scrubbing the pots, wiped her hand on her long skirt and waited. 

“Edee”, Govindan Pillai called out. 

Subhadra sighed deeply, got up and went to her husband. 

He looked her up and down, as if assessing her and asked: “Why does this dirty house smell of fish?” 

“The pond was cleaned today”, Subhadra replied, fully aware that she could have said that a crow had dropped a fish head on the front yard, and it would have made no difference. On the days Govindan appeared on the portico, often leaning on one of his sons or a newly made friend, the questions he asked did not matter, neither did her answers. 

The first slap from Govindan’s fat and strong palms shook the only remaining molar teeth on the left side of Subhadra’s mouth. The remaining blows fell on her back and thighs, and one on her abdomen, which made her crouch and crumble in a heap on the floor. Ten minutes later, after kicking the fallen figure on the ground a few times more, Pillai took a respite from the physical outburst by untying the dirty mundu on his head and wiping his glowering face with it, spreading mud stains all over his already mud streaked face. At that moment in the night, even before his impending death, Govindan looked like a ghost. 

Damodaran slowly emerged from the shadows and hastily helped his mother to her room before his father could deduce that sufficient punishment has not been dispensed with. For the rest of the family, the wait was over. The young boys urinated under the plantain shrub, washed their faces and gurgled their mouths with cool water freshly fetched from the well, and spread their mattresses on the verandah which their father had left a few minutes ago. The younger ones snuggled under the single blanket even in the sweaty summer night out of fear of mosquitoes the size of one’s thumb. Subhadra lay awake on her bed until she heard the snores of her obliterated husband and thought about the ancient days when she still nursed the illusion called love. 

The next day morning, Govindan was found dead on his bed. The paneless window, their only solace from the summer heat, stood as an omen even as his wife declared that in the darkness of the night, she had seen the hands of the killer, which extended across the window and squeezed the neck of the tahsildar with one hand, while smothering him with the other, until life trickled out of him. In the horror of the scene unfolding before her, Subhadra had fallen down unconscious, hit the floor, and lay there engulfed in live nightmares till early dawn. 

If not for the red welts around his neck, and the nails that dug deep on the left cheek of his face, Govindan’s death would have been as natural as it could have been. Murder of someone this affluent and was an unpleasant state of things for the family and the entire village. News that spread out regarding the abnormality of Govindan’s death was suppressed within the appropriate boundaries, not allowing to seep out to the ones who might bother themselves with discovering the unpleasantness of truth. For the rest of the world, Govindan, owing to his haphazard drinking habits, had died of a massive stroke. 

***** 

On her deathbed, Subhadra remembers the hands that killed the tahsildar to its last detail. The right hand around his neck, that choked and ultimately killed him, was bare and inconsequential. But, even at 85 she could vividly recall the left hand over her husband’s mouth, the fresh scar that run from the thumb to the wrist and the faded golden bangle with red and green motifs that shone in the dark. Several times before that night, she had seen the hand, she knew whose bangle it was, yet had not spoken a word of it to anyone. She had her family to preserve. 

The home nurse who is assigned to take care of her when the rest of the family is busy building their lives, comes into the room to check on her. She pushes a pan between Subhadra’s legs and encourages her to relieve herself. Subhadra tries, and a few droplets trickle down. She does not like it, this lying like the invalid that she is, and seeking the help of a stranger to perform the simple task of urination. 

Subhadra does not complain; she has lived a full life, and now watch contently as the others live theirs. Because her husband died in harness, she earned a job a few months after his death. Damodaran took over as the master of the house, and fields and groves under them flourished over the years. Madhu became an engineer, went to Persia and on his return, filled the house with the fragrance of Arabian richness. The two girls were married off to well to do families. Only the youngest boy took to alcohol like his father, and died a premature death with a badly perforated liver to his credit. 

Subhadra played a valuable part in the lives of her children and grandchildren. In turns, she moved from house to house, spending sleepless nights with the infants when their mothers still lay in the pain of labor, ironed the clothes of the menfolk before they started to office, cooked, cleaned and visited temples whenever free to pray for the wellbeing of her family. As time moved on, the next generations inherited her. She moved from houses with kerosene stoves to the ones with induction cookers, from the ones where a single radio transmitted *Suprabhatham* in the morning, to the ones where a complete news coverage from around the world rang out from a slim television at 7 in the morning. She cleaned more butts, and treated more runny noses with Tulsi leaves and hot lemon, and prayed to more Gods, and fried more *vadas* and *unniyappams*, and succeeded in remaining important to several people until the day she slipped on the slimy floor of the toilet, hit her head on the stone which was placed inside the bathroom to wash underwear and the callous underside of the feet, and lost her usefulness. Overnight, Subhadra became a liability, a used furniture with a broken leg that can neither be displayed in the portico, nor could be thrown out due to the unnecessary emotional value attached with it. 

She still did not complain, not when talks about her turned to whispers, and when she heard discussions evaluating who she had been most useful to, and therefore in turn morally entrusted to taking care of her. But finally, the stars were beginning to glow for all of them, when Subhadra was detected with third stage of cancer in the blood. The end was near, and the imminence of it brought everyone together, counting and recounting Subhadra’s love for her family, choking some throats with tears, and cracking some others’ with the closest it could get to genuine sorrow. 

“Did you get it?”, Subhadra asks the home nurse. 

The home nurse nods her head morbidly. She was no stranger to death, but every time it affected her afresh. She has received strange requests from terminal patients on death beds, almost all of which she has fulfilled to the best of her abilities. One had asked her to string a garland of fresh jasmines which he could smell as he died, another wished to listen to non-Bengali songs of Manna Dey. 

But all that Subhadra did was to make her retrieve an old dusty trunk box from under the bed, and remove something wrapped in polythene cover from the bottom of it. The nurse squeezed the package hard and felt the rounded edges of something solid within. This packet, the nurse was still holding when Subhadra looked up at her. 

“Open it for me”, Subhadra whispered. 

The nurse tugged at the jute thread that was wrapped several times around the polythene cover. She was reminded of a mummified body from centuries ago being stripped of the last shreds of dignity of dirty linen in the name of archaeology, and wondered if there was something religious within the cover that she was now similarly denuding and possibly desecrating. Under the polythene cover, there was a newspaper wrapping which had turned yellow, the writings on it in old Malayalam script faded into a greyish hue. The nurse gently parted the paper and took out the object. Subhadra held out her hand, she placed it on her palm. 

“Leave now”, Subhadra asked. 

“Senility of the old”, mumbled the nurse and withdrew to a discrete corner of the room from where she could observe her patient. 

Subhadra was not senile though, not at that moment anyway. Like every octogenarian, she has been dragged along the trodden and inevitably ugly route of growing old. The phase of falling teeth and dentures and the accompanying suspicious stares of the young ones seated at the table, fearing whether an especially prolonged cough from the old lady might cause the artificial teeth to splash into the large bowl of sambar on the center. The phase of hiding *ladoos* and *jalebis* under the pillow and forgetting them until ants hike their way across to the sweets and get derailed into one’s ears and nose. The phase of farts that could not be contained and burps that were too loud. The phase of threatening others that today is probably the day of one’s death, and sulking when they smile it off. The phase where prayers became routines, and the images of Gods faded in the frames of their familiarity. 

She has passed through the quagmire, and has reemerged at the other end, to the moment nearest to death when thoughts attain clarity and any sound other than that one her own labored breathing, is redundant. 

The first rays of sun on a day which she would not live to see, were seeping through the open windows of her room. One stray ray of sunlight has the audacity to attack her cataract eyes with a glare. She lifts her left hand up to cover her eyes. For the first time in 52 years, the red and green motifs of the bangle on wrinkled wrists twinkle, and signals to her that it is time. 

-- Regards, Vidya Panicker 