From: jim kasom <jim_kasom@yahoo.com>
Date: 20 November 2016 at 17:42
Subject: Submission
To: "outofprintmagazine@gmail.com" <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>
I'm Jim Wungramyao Kasom, a Travel Photographer and Writer. I have an MA Mass Communication from AJK, MCRC Jamia. My stories and articles have been published in both online and print magazines like Muse India, Contemporary Literary Review India and Reading Hour Magazine. My short story 'The Homecoming' won 2nd prize at Wordweavers short story competition 2012. I was born and raised in Ukhrul, Manipur and now lives in New Delhi. One of my stories, 'Crossings' is part of the reading list on Northeast India Literature at Ambedkar University. 

*The Perfect Gift* 

It was one of those evening when the swallows would glide and scythe the sky and skim over tinned roofs, drawing some children to the gutter with the slightest hope that the swallows would collide and fall with a thud but the swallows kept missing the roof by a whisker. It was a vibrant evening and joyful cries of children replicated the screeching of swallows. Young men were busy wooing young ladies. And boys with their playful spirit amused themselves by riding bikes made from woods, and rolling them downhill. It was an inexpensive replacement for real bikes. 

The village had no other government establishments except for a high school. So the villagers were either teachers or farmers. There was a veterinarian and an anganwadi worker but that was it. It was a jovial season as the fields were harvested and the school closed for winter break. At night, farmers regaled stories by the flickering fire. Their granaries stocked and heart weightless from the abundance. The church opulently adorned, suffused with lights and coated with new paints. It was a time of waiting, for the onset of something big. The only time the hard working farmers could afford to stay at home. 

Maya stood at the village square observing the Christmas spirit came alive on the young and old; even the landscape. Autumn had slithered with her warmth. Winter, whittled out of the cold had set in and the hills had turned brown. Maya was no longer a child, but yet to be counted as men. The pride one discovers on the verge of boyhood has to do lot with his inclination towards manhood but to a larger extend it was also because of the time he had to live through. On and off brush with the Kukis had stimulated his understanding of life and the ugliness of it. Before he turned seventeen, he was counted old enough to be given the responsibility of guarding the village. The Naga-Kuki tribal feuds had a long history and many lives were lost to it. Villages were burned and the war spared neither women nor children. Young men were taught to shoot guns and arrows with a catapult before they took up the responsibility of guarding the village in turns. It was an uncertain time and they slept with their clothes on, so that they would not be caught unaware even at night. Each Tangkhul village was like a small kingdom and they were responsible for their own defenses. Fences were raised and trenches dug. But even war made exception for an unperturbed Christmas celebration in this part of the land. There were no written agreements for a cease fire but both parties eased up fighting with the onset of winter. 

The nearest town was Ukhrul, some thirty three kilometers from the village. Maya had gone out of the village just a few times. He set his eyes on the road and imagined all the walks he had taken to town. Half the year, the road was a muddy field; incessantly wet from the monsoon rains. In winter the road dried up and a few inches deep layer of dust settled above the road. The road which had up till now remained dormant came alive with travellers taking the road. There were people leaving and arriving each day. Christmas shopping had to be done and there were less frequent visitors who had returned to celebrate Christmas in the village. 

At a distance, a jeep drove up the road, followed by hordes of excited children. Not many vehicles plied the road and when it did it was a form of entertainment, for the young and old alike. The young were enthralled by the running machine and the old were intrigued at who would show up on it. To Maya their return brought a sense of intrigue and charm to the place he had not known before. 

The Jeep came to a halt and dust rose up from underneath like a blanket. All plays came to a halt and all eyes were on the vehicle as if a circus was passing. Through the maze of dust lit golden by the evening sun, Maya saw Nimri slink out of the back seat. He had not seen any girl so beautiful and captivating. She had bright eyes and when she removed the blue scarf that covered her head, black hair slid down to her shoulders. Maya heart pranced like a colt and he didn’t understand his feelings. He smiled, ashamed of the strange feeling that made his heart weak. He wanted to be indifferent to such feelings and be brave. 

“That’s the most beautiful thing I have seen,” said Ayung, walking up from behind, “I wouldn’t hesitate to marry her.” 

The brutal honesty of it took Maya by surprise. They looked at each other and burst out laughing unable to contain their feelings. Earlier it was toys and plays that occupied their mind. Now they have dreams and ambitions. They wanted to do something important with their lives, something big but they were uncertain. 

“She is beyond our league,” Maya said. “So what? We can catch up. We can become big,” Ayung said with the least bother. “How?” Maya asked. “We could go to college and move to town and get a job, if that’s what you meant,” Ayung said. “Maybe that alone is not enough,” Maya said. “I don’t know what you are talking about but I wouldn’t let anyone intimidate me. We should go for *meisum* at her place” Ayung said. “But we have not been to any *meisum*,” Maya said. “Then we must start,” Ayung said. 

Ayung had a brashness Maya had not seen in him before. They were neighbors and grew up together as best friends. They could talk about anything without hesitation. Maya had been with Ayung more than anyone but he was surprised by this new found assertiveness. They have both seen how war turned boys into men but they it was the first time a girl had raised their spirit so high. Their emotions were driven to the edge. 

Maya had been having strange feelings. Even in the company of friends he felt lonely, as if his dreams were growing too big for his small existence. He was growing taller; his voice deeper and new ideas kept coming in waves. There were now lesser meanings and pleasures in the plays they once submerged themselves with. He had begun hunting over a year ago and had found solace in it. The immensity of the mountains quieted his mind and stilled his nerves. The existence of something much greater than he could comprehend calmed him. 

For the next two nights they went around Nimri’s house like eagles circling over the sky, looking for a meal. It was a small village where someone’s arrival was news and there were other boys eager to catch up on her at *meisum*; a tradition form of courting girls. It was like dating, only more traditional. They would sit around a fire at night after a day’s work is done and talk through. Both times they could not dispel their nervousness and they retuned devastated, like defeated warriors. Nimri’s father was the first civil servant from the village and his dignity and name unnerved them even though they had not sat in front of him. Just the presence of him in the house was enough to parry them off. She and her brother were raised in towns and cities and it was the first time the family had returned to spend Christmas in the village. She was raised in opulence but she had pleasant dispositions and simplicity of a country girl. 

The Christmas celebration was a three to four days affair among the Tangkhuls. Before they converted to Christianity in the late 19th century, festivals were year round. Now Christmas was all they were left with and they celebrated with vengeance. At the end of each day, towards evening, young men and women marched from one end of the village to another, singing Christmas hymns. It was as if they were performing a cleansing ceremony. Their singing echoed far and wide and just the rawness of it was beautiful and amused Nimri. On the first day itself, Maya walked beside Nimri and when she smiled he felt a pull. He walked her home afterwards. From then on she crossed his mind all the time and when he looked into her eyes, things brightened as if there were fireworks exploding in his head. 

On the last day of Christmas, they didn’t walk home but sauntered up a hill, a little further from the village. From the peak they could see the valley and terraced paddy fields below and blue waves of mountains further away. They sat down on a bench and faced the sunset. Maya was just a country boy. He didn’t know what he wanted to do with his life. Nimri knew exactly what she wanted and it intimidated him. She told him that she wanted to become a lawyer. 

“You know what it is right?” Nimri asked as honestly as she could. He nodded. “What do you want to become?” she asked. Her boldness bothered him. He couldn’t look straight into her eyes. In the mountains, he was bold and strong. He had self-assurance. Now all of that melted under her gaze. “I haven’t figured out yet,” he said. “That’s ok,” she said. 

Her thoughtfulness and ingenuity surprised him. She was daunting but he could talk his mind to her because she was accepting. They didn’t feel like boys and girls but two grownups. They were not trained for this moment but like grown men and women they embraced it. Away from the eyes of the villagers, his confidence grew back. At that moment he felt a weight lifted off his mind. He was not attached to any past, family name or achievements. He was just himself; the person of that moment. 

Maya was doing ok in school but he didn’t believe he could do something useful out of it. He had sat in wooden classroom with cracks on the wall; holes on the roof that dripped in rain and rats running on the mud floor once in a while. There was nothing much that stirred his mind towards college. Most of his seniors dropped out sooner or later; got married and raised young families. Attending school was deemed successful if one learned to read and write. Only a handful made it to college and went on to live in towns. He had not had enough thinking done. A lot of boys wanted to become truck drivers and drove away from the village. It was one of those very few outlets, away from farming which was a tough way of life. Their forefathers were gatherers and farmers and it was the life passed down. They knew no other life. The land was everything and they were to show reverence to it with hard work and the land would provide. It was a symbiotic relationship and life was basic. Towns and cities opened new ways of life and they were drawn towards it like insects to a light bulb, but at the same time they were skeptical of what they could lose. 

“I’m jealous of you and the life you could live here. You have so many old people to tell stories to you. You could go into the forest anytime. If I could, I would choose this life. The only downside is that there are no colleges or jobs,” Nimri said. Maya thought she was wise beyond her years. 

“You love this place because you only came here once in a while. You never know what it’s like is when everyone is gone. When the festive spirit dies down and it’s just the village and the people who can’t afford to move away,” Maya said. 

“Maybe you are right in your own way. But I love it here. It will never change whether I live here or away,” said Nimri, and continued, “If I could go into the woods I would love to see a hornbill,” Nimri said. 

“Why a hornbill? Why not any other birds or animals?” Maya asked. His eyes lit up. Wild animals and forest were his realms. “Do you know that the female hornbill when it began to incubate sealed herself off, leaving just an opening big enough for its bill to receive food from the male? They are not simply birds. Such loyalty, such trust, they are more than birds. Didn’t you know that story of a man who turned into a hornbill?” she said. “Yes, I guess every Tangkhul knows the story,” Maya said. “Do you believe it?” She asked. “I don’t know. I have always thought of it as an old story, nothing more,” he said. She smiled. 

Feathers of hornbills were worn as headgears and its significance or just the attestation of beauty among the Tangkhuls cannot be matched by any birds. No other animals get more pride and glory in death than this bird. Hornbills are mythical beings- turned into birds from human. According to Tangkhul folklore, a stepson was so ill treated by his stepmother that she sends him to live in the paddy field. It became so unbearable that he started chiseling wings out of Khangkhuithei trees, its barks light and white as snow. He tried his wings and perfected his flight. He flew away and got his freedom. One day when he was taking a swim in a pool with other birds, his father followed him, took his wings and hid it in a bamboo basket at the barn. He followed his father home and pleaded to return his wings. His father would not listen. One day when his father was away he asked his little brother to show the hidden wings, in return for one beautiful feather. He kept his promise and gave his brother a beautiful feather before he flew away forever. 

When Maya and Nimri walked down the hill to the village, he held her hand briefly. He wanted to keep holding her hands like a grown man but when they came to the village gate, he let it go. He was not old enough to keep anything permanent. It was a fleeting age and he felt anything could slip out of his fingers, except life. He was young and he felt immortal but vulnerable. He wanted to hold her hands longer and promise her that he would never let her go. She was leaving the village in few days’ time to the city. He imagined if she would have talked to her the same way, if they met in a city. Would she see him the same? Would she be the same when she returns? Suddenly he felt distanced from her. He felt unsure as his mind foraged in the world of adults; of complication and doubts. They walked home quietly, unsure of what to make of the moment they had shared. 

Overlooking the village was a tall mountain that cast giant shadows in the evening. The forest was filled with bonsum trees and Hornbills came to feed on its fruits. Maya was determined to give beautiful feathers of these birds as gift to Nimri, to remember him by. He woke up early and prepared himself for the arduous journey. He waded through the dew drenched bushes trying to pick up the trail he had walked the previous year. Those beautiful black and white feathers fetched good money and he had sold a few of them in town. 

Maya gently placed his rifle on his bony shoulder. The usually light brown butt has now turned burnt sienna. On the right side of it was a cross warped out with a knife that once belonged to his father. The barrels have become thin from continuous use over the years. Earlier it smelled of oil polish. Now it smells of rust. It was not a rifle to be revered. But it remained a deathly weapon in the right hands. 

After more than three hours of perilous climb he reached the pinnacle of the mountain. From the peak he could see the village sprawled on top of the hill below. He felt melancholic; a feeling of loss he hadn’t felt before. He had always felt an antipathy to the place he was born and had always wanted to move away like most boys in the village. Some became handymen to truck drivers and some of them joined NSCN (IM). Born in a small place, they felt trapped. Nimri’s return had given a spark; a new found love for the place. He saw the place from her eyes. Now the difference to any place was her. 

The wind was dashing hard on the trees facing the cliff. Most of these trees were disfigured, allowing fewer boughs to come up on the side facing the wind. They formed a crooked line along the cliff, bluntly chopped off; then spreading to a valley below. 

He saw the river shimmering in the sunlight making its way through the valley. He stood there his soul consumed and ravaged by beauty. This feeling was strange to him. He had been on the mountain many times before and he had not felt anything close to it. He found himself deluged with these feelings; clambered with wild imaginations- taking on those immense black and white wings; he glided down the cliff, over the valley. With the coldness of brumal winds slicing his face those feelings soon disappeared. 

Maya positioned himself beneath the tallest tree. He saw the wind fluttering the leaves and it seemed to him that he was seeing the formless wind. He could have climbed and positioned higher up but the trunk bifurcated far too high and the trunk was colossal. 

The sun was drooping low and the crimson beams were strobing on the river turning the river golden. A puff of orange cloud shrouded over the tip off the tree. Maya fixed his gaze on the clouds and he felt the trees falling over him. He felt a nauseating sensation. The next instant he saw a pair of hornbills gliding gracefully towards him. They were in a rhythm not hurrying, not lazing. The flapping sound reached his ears. They took perch among the sternly tops facing the wind. 

Evening was transcending into darkness. He kept his eyes parallel to the barrel and aimed his gun at one of the birds; now visible as a fluffy piece of white and black against grey sky. He felt his fingers to the trigger but something held him back. A sense of compunction crept into his soul. All the stories he had heard about the hornbills churned his emotion to a high. The birds were rubbing their peaks. Maya lowered his gun. At that point he couldn’t understand the feeling that came over him. If he let the birds go, he would have no gift now to bring to Nimri and that she could be gone forever. But something much deeper stirred his soul. He wanted to do the right thing. He couldn’t simply kill one of the birds and live with the guilt and the curse of the other creature. They were saved by their togetherness and life was his gift to them. 

The next morning when Nimri leaves the village, she would take away something from the place. It was true with everyone he knew. Every time someone he knew left the village they took something indispensable along with them. If a place has a soul, it would be the conglomeration of little pieces of all the souls who ever visited it. That winter, she came like a whimsical dream and he went along with it. Now, he didn’t want to move back to that war; to that feeling of slow-sinking; to that feeling of being trapped. 

When he gazed into the western horizon, the birds were now visible as a dark blob against crimson sea. He sensed a ripening change overwhelming him, an unknown joy wriggling to be born. He didn’t know what he wanted but he had years on his side and he was determined not to let anyone intimidate him again. If he could survive the mountains, he had a good chance of surviving in the city, if he wanted to. He composed himself and smiled. It stayed on his face, long after the birds were gone. 

