From: Priyanka Sethy <psethy@uchicago.edu>
Date: 21 November 2016 at 03:12
Subject: SUBMISSION
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>

*Bio:* I'm a fourth year undergraduate at the University of Chicago, and am majoring in Political Science, with a Creative Writing minor. Reading has always been my first love and it soon developed into a passion for writing. I have had short stories published in Muse India and the Madras Mag, and write for the University of Chicago's Admissions Office. 


Circles of Salt 

The mountains saw everything. Nobody could hide from us. As if ancient creatures fossilized under our thin scales of forests and ice, our ridged backs loomed over the horizon, little villages nestled in between our sprawling vertebrae. White of peak regardless of the season, we sent the howling monsoon winds down our steep slopes and into the very depths of the valley. On those nights, the skies would be tinged with a hint of blood and the moon would watch the theatre unfold in the valley below. Trees and electric poles would sway drunkenly to the mystic whirling of nature, and tin roofs would vibrate, their shivers clanging in time to the dance of the cosmos. 

But the white bungalow that rose majestically up against the backdrop of our craggy sides would stand tall and strong. It had been in Mr. Kapoor’s family for generations enough that it was now treated as practically a venerable elder – no cracks were permitted to mar its surface; no weeds dared grow at the base of its walls. The thick walls were now uneven with decades of white-washing, but they stood firm against the elements; as they had against the thunder and monsoon, and other, more painfully potent tragedies. Mrs Kapoor had been brought into it as a young bride, her own humbler origins white-washed by imported makeup. 

The marble slab embedded into the wall to the right of the gate boldly proclaimed ‘Avinaashi’ in golden letters, home of the immortal, the imperishable. Shaam, the servants’ boy, knew this because he had just learnt to read full English words in the dusty classrooms of the village school. His elder brother’s books were far beyond Shaam’s elementary skills, and so he had spent his free time that week exploring the grounds in search of simpler words – words engraved on to the barks of mango trees by lovelorn trespassers, words scribbled on to a shopping list in the kitchen in the cook’s ungainly hand. 

The estate was an enchanting one, complete with thickets, a bordering stream and rough patches of purple heather that were perfect for a child to run around in. Mrs Kapoor, the lady of the house, liked gardening. Her particular brand of that recreation involved following around the hired gardener and issuing instructions to him, while purchasing pretty but impractical patterned tools that she attempted to impose onto the reluctant fellow. Unlike other memsahibs, she gave the servants’ children the run of the lawns, and their squeals and sounds of play often percolated into the drawing room, where she would sit, knitting in hand, and lips bared back in a smile. Every now and then, she would allow Shaam to carry her gardening basket ahead of her as she went for her daily inspection of the flowers. He would stifle giggles as the gardener would quickly throw his old iron spade into a nearby bush and pull out a dainty floral pink one as he would see them approaching. 

Though prone to temperamental bouts of hot anger, her husband, the Sahib, was a fair man. He let the children use the library too. It was a large room with a high ceiling and dust motes filling the few spaces where natural light reached. Mrs Kapoor had set aside a desk with children’s books, and Shaam along with the cook’s son would often be allowed to choose one and take it to their little shack behind the main house for a couple of days. In fact, she had even given Shaam’s elder brother, Raja, the most prestigious and coveted permission to actually sit on the cushioned chairs at the broad wood tables and study for his military examinations in that formidable room. She was a fine woman. 

*** 

So when Mrs Kapoor failed to emerge for her customary stroll one morning, the servants’ children worried, and got in the way of the busy adults with their questions. That is, all the children except Shaam, who had refused to get out of bed, citing a chill. The last night had been stormy, and he had been loitering around near the stream at the end of the grounds, watching in fascination as the lightning seemed to crack open the sky and light up the ring of peaks circling the valley. “No wonder”, clucked his harried mother, Savitri, as he emerged sniffling from under the covers. When the children’s doubts were satisfied with impatient flaps of hands tied up with work, they finally left for school, though a couple of minutes late. Shaam stayed in his bed, looking up at our aloof and distant facades, separated from him by the dirty windowpane and the tearing wire mesh. 

Their parents were left to deal with the storm gathering in the morning room. The first indication that something was wrong appeared with Mr Kapoor, who had come down for breakfast with his collar buttoned wrong and his tie too short. He was a large man and the tie looked almost comical to Shaam’s father, Bhola, who was mopping the marble floor. While Mr Kapoor waited for his usual fried egg, his eyes kept shifting erratically under his furrowed brow, the way they did when he was thinking hard about something. His left hand was kneaded into a fist under his chin, and his right tapped the heavy teak table with a regularity that nearly drove Bhola crazy. By the time the cook brought out the egg, the room felt like the inside of time bomb, ready to burst. 

“Will memsahib be having breakfast in her room today?” ventured the cook. He glanced uncertainly at Bhola, who gave an imperceptible shrug in response to the unasked question. 

Mr Kapoor stopped tapping and his bushy eyebrows swung up to look straight at the cook’s face. The poor man looked bewildered in response. Mrs Kapoor had recently had the walls of the room painted a pale blue, and they closed in on the scene from all directions. 

Without answering the question, Mr Kapoor slid the saltshaker towards his plate and waved his fingers to send the cook away. However, just as the man reached the threshold of the room, he called him back with a sharp shout and snort of finality. 

“I want all the servants assembled here at nine o’clock,” he said with a decisiveness that prevented even the usually incautious Bhola from asking for any sort of explanation. Then he pushed the chair away, and walked straight back into the hall, leaving wet footsteps on the newly mopped floor. 

The last occasion that had warranted such an assembly had been six and a half years ago. A new kitchen boy had just been employed at that time, and Mr Kapoor had eventually made the startling discovery that the boy was none other than a local bandit from the neighbouring city, who had casually made away with the better part of the silverware from the last house unfortunate enough to give him board. A shiny and uniformed police officer had been called, the boy had been given a sound thrashing, and the village wives gossiped about it for months afterward. “Look at what happened to that idiot,” they would tell their toddlers, “That is why you shouldn’t get in with the wrong ones.” In possession of this sage advice, Shaam’s brother, Raja, used to promptly go find these ‘wrong ones’ beyond the high white walls of the estate and play marbles with them till Bhola would locate him and pull him back by the ear. 

But now Raja spent his time with fat books, the marbles having been relegated to the tiny storage cupboard in the room used as both the kitchen and as their parents’ bedroom. He had recently cleared the Indian Military Academy’s entrance examination after a year of focused studies that Savitri could not have previously thought him capable of. The Kapoors had very kindly paid for his books and for the tutor who came to the old schoolhouse every Wednesday afternoon. They were even going to finance his third-class train ticket to Dehra Dun. There he would have to take a rigorous fitness test to finalize his entry. Bhola’s own father had been a humble soldier, and his eyes still welled up when he thought of even the possibility of his elder son one day being a commanding officer. And so he hoped whatever the problem was, it wouldn’t affect Raja’s trip, which was to take place three days hence. 

*** 

Bhola and the cook walked to the vegetable garden in sombre silence, neither offering to voice the other’s fears. They called out to gardener, the gatekeeper, their wives, and all the other cogs in the system that kept the indestructible house functioning. Quietly, they all huddled in the yard beyond the vegetable garden. Savitri broke into the confused murmurs by flopping down on the ground, mopping her forehead with her dupatta, and asking the question on everyone’s mind, “So, does anyone know what this is about?” She was met with doubtful glances and averted eyes. Exasperated, she began again, “Charan, we all know you broke that glass plate while washing it and tried to hide the pieces in the trash; Mali ji, forgive me but everybody knows you don’t actually use those ridiculous tools memsahib gives to you.” She looked around at the wide-eyed stares. “This has to be something different, something a lot worse.” 

The relentless sun beat down on their informal court. Then the cook’s wife interjected. She was a plump, jovial sort, with the apple-red cheeks that only women born and bred on our highest slopes could have. “Come, come, don’t get paranoid now, Savitri. For all we know, memsahib could just be seriously unwell and we’re all going to be told about it together. That would explain why Sahib is so upset. Maybe she’s dying.” Optimistic voices rose into a collective affirmative that backed up this relieving train of thought. 

Savitri sneered at the attempt of the woman to usurp her earlier position as speaker. She brushed it aside, “We weren’t called like this even when Sahib’s mother died.” 

That shut them up. 

*** 

At precisely nine o’clock, eight wary faces were lined up in the morning room. Bhola inwardly sighed at the prospect of having to mop the floor again. At nine-fifteen, the Kapoors came downstairs. “Sit down, sit down,” Mr Kapoor hurriedly indicated to the gathering. He settled himself at the head of the table. She stood behind him. A couple of inches below, the rest sat down cross-legged on the carpet to the side. 

Mr Kapoor coughed awkwardly and began, “Look, we trust you and all. We always have. You know that. Some of your families have been working in this house since before I was even born. I don’t want you to think that I haven’t thought about what I have to say.” He paused, as if hoping they would reassure him. They did not. The lines on his forehead suggested that he had, indeed, thought about it. But all his thinking had made this topic no easier to broach. 

“What have we not given you?” he started again, with a heavy sigh in their direction. “A home, food, water, electricity. We even sent your children to school. We paid for your medicines. And yet, in our own house…” The sentence trailed off. He glanced up at Mrs Kapoor. She looked down silently, as if reluctant to be there. 

“My wife’s wedding ring has been stolen.” 

There was a short and collective moment of relief at finally being put out of unsettled speculation, and then sharp inhalations of breath as the consequences hit each of them. 

The cook’s wife immediately cried out, the redness in her cheek having spread to the rest of her chubby face “Oh no, the gate must have been left unlocked last night! God have mercy! Did anyone check it? Or hear anything?” 

Mrs Kapoor’s head snapped up at this way out and she gently offered in agreement, “Yes, it could have been one of those rascals who are always loitering around outside.” Mr Kapoor silenced her with a brusque look. “The gatekeeper locked it after I came back from dinner.” 

“Look, I don’t like accusing any of you. But I don’t know what else to do,” he continued, with a look back at his wife. “This ring has been in family for six generations now. How will I face my ancestors?” His gaze wandered to the ceiling, and a deep line in his jaw emerged to match the ones under his receding hairline. He folded his hands in front of his face and brought them down hard on the tabletop, as if shaken out of his philosophical trail of thought. Savitri recognized the rising boil of his temper. He continued in a harder, clipped tone. 

“We trusted you all. Whoever has done this will be caught. Don’t think you can get away.” 

The silent congregation immediately broke out into indignant cries, and Mr Kapoor hastily indicated that they quiet down. 

“Silence please! Kindly tell me where you all were from eight o’clock to nine last night. Madam left the ring on her dresser before she went out to the garden, and when she came back…” he shrugged his shoulders, “gone.” 

Savitri rose to this occasion. With a flourish, she swept her dupatta away from her sweating face, and got up. “Sir, Mali ji was weeding the tomatoes in the vegetable patch,” she pointed at the left-most figure, and then proceeded to give detailed explanations of the required whereabouts of each servant (ending with herself), albeit in a rather shrill tone. Once this task was complete, she loudly caught her breath and appealed towards Mr Kapoor with a pleading expression. 

He looked up at his wife impatiently, “Well, it couldn’t have disappeared into thin air, could it? Someone in this room is responsible for this.” 

Then Mrs Kapoor, who had been mostly detached from the conversation till then, stepped forward. The stately greyish blue skirt of her tunic and white muslin dupatta rustled as she moved past her husband. “I think everybody has been accounted for. They could not have done this.” 

Savitri beamed at her, the saviour of the innocents. 

But Mr Kapoor held firm. Ignoring his wife’s proclamation, he quietly asked, “Where were your children?” 

The chilling silence that followed was punctuated by the loud ring of the doorbell. Mr Kapoor immediately ejected himself from the dining chair and disappeared in the direction of the front door. The servants broke out into fervent explanations all together that flowed into one winding stream of unintelligible and ineffective noise. 

The conclusion they had reached, by the time Mr Kapoor walked in with the burly police commissioner, was that all the children had been accounted for except Savitri’s boys, Shaam and Raja, who had been roaming around the grounds on their own, separated from the pack. 

*** 

The late afternoon sunlight broke onto Shaam’s upturned face and gently brought him out of his slumbering state on the hard roof of the shack, where he had been lying in defiance of his mother’s instructions. A breeze swept across the roof from the west, where the low sun was cradled between two gentle peaks. It resembled a ripe orange mango hanging in the sky, spreading its spilling juice into the layers of blue. Hazy purple silhouettes of our craggy peaks emerged from the valley as if islands in a swirling sea of mist, bases indistinguishable from the ghostly dust hovering at the lower altitudes. From this distance we seemed absolutely flat to Shaam, as if set pieces in a play, each ridge a lighter shade than the previous one. 

“Shaam! Shaam!” his mother’s shouts interrupted his roaming thoughts and snapped him into a bolt upright position. She was back from her duties too early. He clambered down the rusted ladder and attempted to swing himself back into his and Raja’s room through the window, before Savitri discovered his absence. But she was already standing in the doorway, her features moulded by an expression of extreme distress. He got ready to justify, to explain. The room had been too hot. He had just wanted fresh air. Fresh air never hurt anybody, did it? 

But Savitri brushed aside her little boy’s protests and did not seem to care in the very least about his infraction. Instead, she barked at him, out of breath, but not with anger, “Shaam, who were you with last night?” 

“With Raja near the stream … why, what happened?” he responded uncertainly, attempting to extricate his second leg from the window, confused at his mother’s reaction. 

“Someone stole some ring of Memsahib’s. They called the police also. You were with him the whole time, weren’t you?” she asked in desperation. 

“Some ring ..?” he trailed recollecting his memories of the previous night, . Savitri scrutinized him, waiting impatiently for her doubts to be put at ease. 

But as he cycled through his thoughts, his eyes slowly widened as a terrible thought came to mind – a thought so terrible it was too difficult to put into words. 

“Why don’t you say something?” Savitri exclaimed with an exasperation that was quickly turning to dread as the pallor of her son’s face whitened, but no words came out of his open mouth. 

What was going through Shaam’s mind at that moment? We know, because the mountains know everything. At that exact point of time, in that pinprick of a valley in the upper reaches of the Himalayas, a little boy was seeing scenes that were six years old, scenes that he was sure would repeat themselves if he opened his mouth to tell the truth. His eyes were not focussed on his fretting mother standing in front of him, but on a police officer from the past, who was thrashing a young boy with a metal-tipped wooden rod made of the strongest bamboo to ever spring up in the lower plains. Shaam’s ears did not hear his mother’s repeated pleading or the quiet evening song of the bird outside his window, but were deafened by the boy’s protests that he was innocent, that the Kapoors were wrong, screeches and howls for anyone on earth, in heaven, in hell – in any of the three worlds of the cosmos – to save him from the attacks. Little by little, as Shaam’s mind’s eyes closed in on the boy’s face, he saw with a start that it was his own. And right before his head snapped back up to the present, he saw the circle of people around, who just watched and did nothing as his own cries faded away and actions grew more and more limp. 

*** 

“Where were you? Tell me, son,” the uniformed man kindly asked Shaam from his high perch on the chintz sofa. 

Shaam sat cross-legged on the floor below, “Near the stream,” he mumbled, eyes trained on the fine cracks in the old tiles of the floor, not daring to look up at the others in the room. 

“Very good, very good, and where was Raja?” 

“With me.” 

“The whole time?” 

Shaam did not respond. His eyes trailed upwards briefly till they reached Mrs Kapoor’s drawn face, before swinging back down. Before the silence could extend further, a voice responded from behind, 

“I’ve told you already. I left Shaam alone, to go to the library. I had to study for my interview.” 

Immediately, Shaam looked up towards Raja standing in the doorway. He had not heard him enter the room. Raja gave him a reassuring little smile, but Shaam just looked back down. 

Pointedly refusing to respond, the policeman looked back at Shaam, “Son, did Raja say he was going to the library?” 

Shaam nodded quickly. 

“He went into the house?” 

“Yes,” whispered Shaam. 

*** 

It had to happen, Mr Kapoor thought to himself grimly, as he cut open his fried egg, and the yellow pooled out. It was nothing personal at all, thieves had to be punished, all thieves and any thieves. Did he regret it? Well, no. But he did feel bad. We could tell from the familiar furrowed brow. When Raja had been brought back from the police station a week later, one of his eyes had refused to open, and the cuts on the bottom of his feet were encrusted with infection. Of course he felt bad, any person would. But Mr Kapoor was a fair man, and the wrong had to be punished. In fact, he had saved the Indian Army from employing a thief. He only wished they had retrieved the ring. 

He looked out onto the lawns sloping towards the rise of our foothills. No, he was no longer the horrid young boy he used to be and now reserved violence for only when it was necessary. It was on those very lawns that he and his father’s valet’s son would needlessly torment and play with the earthworms of the valley for sport. Every monsoon, when their tunnelled homes filled with water, and they were forced onto the surface of the earth, bloated and dried out, we would spot a younger Mr Kapoor go exploring, armed with a salt shaker. 

Together, they both would carefully draw a circle of salt around each slow-moving creature. It would have to be done fast, before the earthworm could change its direction, and effectively, so that no gap in the salt was left. Then they would sit back and watch the fun. The earthworms would amble along initially, till they bumped into the salt directly in front of them. At that instant, their flexible bodies would recoil as the sting hit them. They would turn right, or left, and keep moving, only to be confronted with the same wall of salt. Left, right, left, their lithe bodies would spasm and curl up, looking in desperation for a way out. And then, finally, just when the entertainment was reaching its peak for the boys, the tiny creatures would stop moving all together, death spiriting them away from the long minutes of agony. 

That he did regret, he thought to himself. That was wrong for him to have done. But boys will be boys. 

*** 

On that fateful night, we had been watching the performance from the wings. With every spear of lightning sent down, the village below would light up. We saw Mrs Kapoor that night. 

She had left the house through the side door without an umbrella and had smiled up in peaceful happiness as the drops of heavy rain fell on her face and slid down her skin. First, she walked over to the narrow-leaved lychee trees and watched with satisfaction as the water had begun collecting at their bases. The ripe lychees would turn out large and juicy the next month. Then she moved over to the hibiscus plant and ensured that the trees above it were not blocking its access to the rain. Finally, she walked over to the stream, to her pride and joy; the graceful pink water hyacinths that gently swayed with the current on their bed of green. Their roots were anchored onto the waterbed but their heads danced freely to the sounds of the rain. She sat down on her heels near the edge of the water, and gently cleared away the dead leaves floating and catching in the web of the hyacinth’s fronds. As she placed her left hand directly below the surface of the water to pull one out of the tangled stems, she felt a soft tug on her third finger and something brushed against it. Immediately, her hand recoiled in an irrational fear of eels and snakes and other slippery creatures hiding under the rushing surface of the glittering water. At that moment, something golden and reflective glinted for one brief, tantalizing, second in the current before being carried away, far away, for ever and ever. 

We saw Mrs Kapoor freeze. We saw the fear seize her brain and the void in her mouth open into a mute and wordless scream. She grabbed at the green fronds in vain and pulled them apart, with little care for the velvety petals that were tearing. She stayed unmoving by the stream for a few breathless minutes after that, before getting her wits about her and hurrying back inside. 

But we were not the only ones in the audience. Downstream a little way, and sitting quietly in the unnatural blackness of the storm, was a little boy who had seen it all. 

The next day, in a small shack behind an invincible house, amid memories far and near, an innocence had been snatched away. He would wonder later in his life, when the lightning played upon our jagged facades, why the snowy circle of mountains peaks around him looked as though they were made of salt. 

*********** 