From: Michelle D'costa <pikoomish@gmail.com>
Date: 1 February 2017 at 17:19
Subject: Submission
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>

*Redemption* 

She had worked for us for fifteen years or more. As the days pass I sometimes feel she was hardly with us and maybe that’s why she doesn’t give us missed calls anymore (so we can call her from the international calling card). Other times I can’t remember my childhood without her. Literature is all about people missed. I don’t miss *her* really. Sometimes when I do all the work at home by myself, I do reminisce on my privileged upbringing when she was around. But actually now I miss the stories she used to narrate. They filled my days, making me feel whole. 

I should feel whole now. I am expecting. But I don’t. It is the sixth month. I am not supposed to travel but I want to. There is a story of hers that has been haunting me. One day, in my childhood, I learned about freak shows from *Discovery *and I had shared the same with her. In return she pulled out a story from her repository of stories like a book from a big gothic looking library with gargoyles and all, like the one in the *Beauty and the beast* cartoon. She told me of how there are less and less such monster kids born in Goa now as ultrasounds can predict their monstrosity and save everyone trouble. 

This train of thought led her to a real life example from Goa from the time there were no ultrasounds. A lady whose name she could not recollect. Pregnant. Everyone in the vaado knew that a pregnant woman was not supposed to move a millimeter during the lunar eclipse. Everyone knew.  All that woman had to do was sleep still until the eclipse lasted. Was that so hard? When everyone noticed that the baby born had its tongue lolling out the side of his mouth, they tutted, what an irresponsible mother! Ruined her child’s life, careless. The child was punished for the parents’ mistake. 

I had asked for more such stories. I did not dismiss it as folklore and superstition as it offered a different side to the story I knew about the freaks and I love stories. I loved her stories. I loved her. Her anecdotes fascinated the child in me and I had no idea that as an adult they would return to haunt me like fingerprints of an ex on breasts. 

Maybe it’s not her story that haunts me. Maybe it was all those documentaries of oddities I had seen growing up. I want to see a therapist. But we don’t visit therapists. We talk to friends or/and family. I don’t share my anxieties with my friends as I married late. My pregnancy comes when all my friends are so engrossed in their growing childrens’ lives that they might see me as a mad woman who is just afraid to take the leap. That will only add to the anxiety. I don’t tell my family because, well, they are dead and writing to them in a diary helps only for the moment, a spontaneous release like ejaculation I should imagine. 

My friend in the US has visited a therapist for a recurrent nightmare. I see nightmares with my eyes open. The three-eyed man who reminds me of Shiva, from the fables I was told as a kid. The spider twins who remind me of my spider phobia, I think it has a term, I keep forgetting it but googling it will only bring an avalanche of spider photos. Reverse psychology works now more than ever. I should be looking at photos of beautiful babies. Fair, blue eyes, blond hair. Like the Barbie doll I used to play with as a kid which doesn’t make sense because I’m Indian but we can fool ourselves into thinking we will have an angel like kid, right? Fair. Not wheatish like me. Or dark like him, my husband. I just looked at the photos of the oddities and then I threw up. Was it the repulsion or my pregnancy induced vomit, I can’t tell. 

Maybe I should visit her. We had been to Goa when I was a child. When she was still working for us here in the Gulf. As any foreign tourist, we devoured the alcohol, beaches, seafood and *Sorpatel*. This time I only want to see her. To talk to her. To ask her why she doesn’t call anymore. She hadn’t even made it to my wedding. 

* 

I feel guilty. He will miss me. Maybe he knows. Maybe he knows that my partial reason for travelling is because I want to stay away from him, from his advances. I don’t care if he sleeps with anyone in my absence. I can’t afford to care. All I care about is the baby in my womb now. To get my answers. I open the link- the bookmarked link on my phone and read, again, ‘Boarded the train there’s no getting off.’ *Deviyon aur sajjano, kursi ki peti baandh leejiye- *The announcement follows and I fasten my seat belt in the flight. 

I hadn’t told her. It’s a surprise visit. I’m still a little shaky from the turbulence in the flight. I will not mention it to her or to him (my husband). Nothing happened. It’s all good. I rehearse my Konkani a little loudly, to omit all traces of Mangalorean from it, not worried about people looking at a mumbling pregnant woman. I want to get this right. I try to remember the exact Goan slang my tongue had gotten used to which deteriorated a few years after she left. I want to impress her. To make her feel guilty even. For forgetting me. I will not say a word about it bluntly, won’t show my vulnerability. My slang will do it. I picture her shocked expression on my arrival. And suddenly as if a hammer drops in my stomach I realize that she must have died. It is only after a few moments I feel the physical discomfort. My child had moved. It’s head pressing against my stomach. The pain as if warning me of something untoward. 

She has grandchildren. Will she be at her daughter’s place playing with them? I am nearing her home. The roads are as uneven as they used to be. I’m afraid I will slip and fall. On sensing me approach the dogs in her compound bark. Now everyone will know of my arrival. At first no human pays heed. They are used to the dogs barking. The neighbourhood is safe. It’s not every day a visitor from abroad drops by. Only after few minutes or so, someone exits her house. The house looks new. It looks different from the last time or maybe I remember it differently. 

Will she be eager to please me? Attempt to cook my favourite dishes, Cubey? Cheris? Feel sad for me as I didn’t get to eat anything on the economy flight. She is sitting on a chair. I approach her. I don’t know if I should hug her or not with my stomach in the way. I sit down carefully. Her son is in the house but he is in his room upstairs, I am told by the servant of the house. I am astonished for a minute. The registering of the fact that she was my maid and now she has one of her own. I am thankful her son is living with her and did not follow his father’s footsteps. I look at her. She seems lost. I want to touch her and wake her from her reverie. I am told she doesn’t remember anything but at times there are some things she speaks of. The past. And the wretched witch that I am, I silently hope they are the stories she used to tell me and then I feel guilty. I hand over the small bag to him, I tell him there are some assorted items for her in it. Some dates and Creme24. I don’t remember the other items. I go blank. 

The servant seems embarrassed. He wonders if I have understood his Konkani. But he is even more embarrassed because of what happens a while later after I have drunk Tang- the drink they reserve for special guests, he lets me know. She starts crying softly at first and then loudly. Even the neighbours can hear, I’m sure. I smile at her Konkani, her voice that I had missed so much. She refers to me as ‘their girl’. This attributing me as a pariah strikes me as insensitive. But she is not in the present. She says I have troubled her. Made her cry. I freeze. She must be referring to someone else. I smile awkwardly at the servant. He says no one believes her when her mind time travels. 

Hot tears pour out from my eyes. I am angry. I want to tell the servant that I had never troubled her. The occasional answering back but nothing that would haunt her even years later. Nothing like what they hear happen to maids in the Gulf. We were extremely kind to her as an expat family and she was lucky to have us. But I can’t speak, I feel miserable. Selfish. I walk back, not knowing what to do with the rest of my holidays. I’m a housewife now so no one is waiting for me to return to do anything important. I shouldn’t have come here. It turned out to be worse than I imagined. Who do I speak to now about my anxieties? 

Suddenly I remember that her husband, from whom she had sought divorce and because of whose abandonment she had to work as a maid in the Gulf, lived close by. Did he still live there? I ask around. I remember his name, the only problem, many have the same name here. Michael. I say it not like a foreigner but how she used to say it. Migel. The passersby stop and explain as if they have all the time in the world. I don’t feel I’m living in the 21 st century anymore. They are patient with me. They listen and then they talk. They tell me there are many houses belonging to Migels. Which one was I looking for? 

The only detail I knew of him was that he was living with a younger woman. Could I refer to him that way? Was that still how people referred to him in gossips? She had told me gossips never die in Goa. I tried my chance. I said he lived with a beautiful woman. Only the two of them in one house. 

Oh that one! The man exclaims. 

I reach my destination. I peep inside and see no one. I look around before walking towards the back. A neighbour spots me and yells, ‘Who are you looking for? Migel is sleeping.’ I jerk and almost slip. The lady apologises for startling me. She says I shouldn’t be walking about like this without a man, in this condition. She says I look like I’m from outside, Bombay? 

I tell her I had lost my way. She says she knew it because no one visits Migel. Now that he is a vegetable. I smile after registering what she has said. Smile so crazy I can feel her staring at me. His misery is a result of her (my maid) curses. All her life she had cursed him. Maybe curses do come true. Was she cursing me now? Do curses work even if you don’t mean it? Does it expire? With all these thoughts I try to cross the road. I look left and right. I am extra careful. The curse might work now with her in close proximity. 

With a loud horn of a passing truck all the images return. Three legs or seven toes? Three eyes or a lopsided tongue. After I rule out the extremities I think of the basics. What if the child turns out to be dark? She is dark… So dark I used to not let her feed me with her bare hands because somehow black felt dirty…. 

I remember a line from the Bible: *I am a jealous God, punishing the children for the sin of the fathers...* It’s a Sunday. I haven’t attended mass. I don’t feel guilty because masses here are rarely in English but I feel the need to confess. I know here there are no closed room confessionals. It all happens in the open. With people within earshot. I ask for directions to the closest church. 

* * * 

*Bio:* An Indian, born (1991) and raised in Bahrain, Michelle D’costa has short fiction/ poetry published in Antiserious, The Bombay Literary Magazine, Open Road Review and many others. She edits fiction at Jaggery Literary Magazine. You will find author interviews on her blog: https://michellewendydcosta.wordpress.com/ 

Michelle D'costa c/o Lavina Fernandes 

Julian Chawl, behind Marian villa, station road, Vikhroli (West) Mumbai- 400079 

Mob. No.: 8898352842 

