From: <ashisharti@aol.com>
Date: 27 February 2017 at 12:10
Subject: Submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Maya Angelou's words,"There is no greater agony than bearing an untold story inside you." first inspired me to start writing. That was almost four years ago. Since then, I've managed to blog regularly and get a short story published here: http://kindlemag.in/jamun-tree/ 



*B is for Boobs.* 

I was twelve when the first twinges of jealousy for my cousin, Bani, made me do something so stupid that I never forgave her. Ever. 

Spring was in the air. Water pistols and packets of colour had been bought from the shops. The excitement of Holi was bubbling inside me, bursting to come out. I smuggled a few water balloons to school that morning, but I couldn’t gather up enough courage to tarnish my image. ‘Miss Goody two shoes’ was a title I was proud of. So I never filled them up with water. I carried the balloons back in my blazer pocket, still sealed in the cheap clear plastic bag that crackled every time I put my hand in. It was getting too warm for the blazer but the school calendar was still stuck on winter uniform. 

The day before Holi, cries of “Happy Holi” floated in and out of classrooms in between lessons and lingered on in playgrounds and at the bus stop. 

“Happy Holi Amu!” cried Charu as she slapped red *gulaal* on my right cheek just as I let go of the metal handle on the bus door to step off the bus and onto the road. 

Her wide grin preening through the moving window pane made me forget the tiny red pricks of powder which were starting to stain my white shirt collar. Amma would be too busy with cooking today, I thought. She wouldn’t notice the colour on my collar. No, I won’t be getting told off for this today, I thought to myself as I made my way home. 

“Amma….Amma…food…I’m starving…what’s for lunch?” I burst into the house, impatient with the door, letting go of it too early. It banged with a thud. 

*Gujjias* (sweet stuffed pastries) were being rolled out and stuffed with sweet *khoya* (milk solids) in the kitchen when I flung my heavy school bag on the floor and hung my blazer on the door that afternoon. Amma’s gold bangles were tinkling as she rolled out the dough-- back and forth. 

“At least wash your hands first!” Amma tried to look cross. 

“I did. In the bathroom.” I lied. 

She believed me and let me lick the khoya off the ladle she was using. She even let me puncture the edges of the stuffed *gujjia* with a fork when I told her that I'd used soap to wash my hands. 

I scoffed a few more mouthfuls of the stuffing, secure in the knowledge that Amma was too distracted with the hot oil in the *karahi* (wok) to notice. 

“Amu. Don’t come too close to the *karahi*. It’s hot… and leave the stuffing for the *gujjias.*” She said without turning her head. 

*“Lalchee* *billee *(greedy cat).” announced Ravi, my fourteen year old brother, who appeared in the kitchen like an animal on the prowl and scooped up two extremely hot *gujjias*. 

Juggling with them while blowing on them to cool them down, he vanished before Amma could say anything. 

Early next morning, Holi arrived after I woke up. 

Ravi and I were busy filling up water balloons out in the veranda when Bani came running with her *pichkaari* (water pistol). The sharp slap of cold water hit the side of my neck. I shivered a little, let out a shriek and let go of the neck of the balloon I was holding around the rim of the tap. It whooshed out like a jet and water splashed soaking me through. I giggled. Ravi turned suddenly to tip the half-filled bucket lying next to him over Bani, 

“Bhai! You are horrible! Get him Amu di…get him!” cried eleven year old Bani. 

“Amu di…use the balloons…use this one…” 

He ran out before either of us could take our revenge with the blubbery balls of water balloons lying in the blue plastic tub, waiting to be used as missiles. 

We lost track of time. Shrieks and squeals mingled with threats and pleadings to be spared all day long. Music blared from the neighbour's stereo and glasses of *thandai *kept appearing and disappearing. 

“*Aur hamari* (and our) Ritu emptied three packets of colour on herself before we even left the house!” announced her mother, my auntie, when they came over to play Holi. Auntie clapped her hands together to add theatrical effect to her story and threw her head back and laughed. 

Ritu was six and insignificant to us. 

All of us burst out laughing, ignoring Ritu's cheeks going red under the *gulaal.* Years later, whenever Ritu will recall this memory, I will find it difficult to recollect. 

“Enough girls. *Ab bas karo* (stop now)!” called out mothers and grandmothers and aunties. 

It was past two in the afternoon. 

“Tell the girls to get back inside. They’ve been out all morning. There are too many boys in the colony this year.” ordered fathers, grandfathers and uncles and older brothers. 

Bani and I filled up our *pichkaari *every time a call to get back reached us past the general din. 

“Last one Amma…this is the last one…my *pichkaari *is still full.” 

Why was Ravi allowed to carry on? Why was it not late for him too? 

“Amu, if you don’t get down NOW, I *will* tell Baba and then god help you!” 

Amma’s threat sounded real. I was getting hungry and I’d had so much fun that I didn’t want anything to spoil it, least of all Baba’s disappointed head shaking. He never raised his voice. I always wondered what it would be like to face Baba’s wrath. I’d never heard him speak harshly to me or to Ravi or to Amma or anyone, ever. Yet, the threat always worked. 

“Bani….Bani…” I shouted over the din of music and mayhem, “let’s go…Amma’s calling.” 

Bani turned. Her shoulders drooped down. Like me, she wasn’t done, but girls don’t get to play Holi for as long as boys do, especially when they cross their tenth birthday. I felt sorry for her. She was younger than me. It wasn’t fair. She should be able to carry on. 

That's when I noticed. 

Bani's pale old *kurta *was plastered to her body, dripping with murky brown water-- all the vibrant colours: reds, yellows, greens and blues had come together to make this brownish slush that covered her *kurta* and her face and her hair and her feet and her toenails. But, I didn't notice any of that. I looked at the two balloon like mounds poking through her wet *kurta* and turned green under my own layers of murk. 

Holding the empty blue plastic tub with one hand, I ran down two steps at a time. 

“Amu di…wait for me…Amu di…” 

The tub kept slapping against my thighs. Bani kept calling. But I didn't look back. I went straight to the bathroom and turned the tap. Cold water splattered inside the aluminium bucket and cocooned me in its liquid echoes. Numbed, I didn’t wait for the geyser to start spouting hot water. I shivered and bathed. 

I scrubbed so hard to get all the colour out of my hair that my scalp started bristling. Two full buckets later, I still leaked colour. 

“Don’t forget to use the coconut oil Amu…” Amma hollered from across the veranda. “I changed the bottle…It’s in that Kissan jam bottle…did you find it? It’s on the middle shelf…and rub behind your ears…but not too hard…use the oil first…” Amma’s instructions ran as rapidly as the cold water filling the third bucket. 

Coconut oil was my weatherman when I was twelve. It was semi solid that day, tiny streams of liquid were floating near the edges where oil met glass. The rest of the oil lay soft like fresh butter. Spring had sprung. I put a blob on my palms and slathered it all over me, except my chest. 

“Amu…hurry up *beta*. Ravi needs to clean up, too.” Amma knocked on the bathroom door. 

“And that water tank is for *all* of us.” Ravi butted in. 

The day after Holi, when Amma nudged me to wake up, I struggled to open my eyes. 

“Mmmm…five more minutes.” 

"What are we paying all that fees for?" she chided from the kitchen as she clicked the handles tight on our tiffin boxes. 

I struggled to open my eyes. My body felt heavy and lazy. 

It had been a restless night for me. I couldn’t remember why. Ideas of a plan or was it a dream floated in and out, like wispy clouds on a clear blue sky. I wasn’t sure I’d dreamt it or cooked it all up. 

I bathed and put on my uniform. I took longer than usual to get dressed that morning. 

“Hurry up lazy bones or you’ll miss the bus!” shrieked Ravi in his freshly cracked voice which always made me giggle and that always made him even more mad than usual. 

“Where’s my kiss Amu?” teased Amma as I ran past the kitchen door to escape her scrutiny. 

She’d know if she saw me. I didn’t want her to know. This was personal. She wouldn’t understand. No one else needed to know. 

Armed with a big smile, I walked out of my front door that day. 

Even though the coconut oil lay like melted butter in the bottle early in the morning, I decided to wear my warm woollen vest that fit snugly across my chest. Even though my left cheek was still quite blue (the colour refused to scrub off) and my ears had flecks of green on them, I strode out of the front door with confidence and two rolled up newspaper balls tucked snugly where my breasts will appear almost a year later. The vest kept my new boobs secure and I did up all three buttons of my school blazer for extra measure. 

At the bus stop, in the school bus, on the playground and during morning assembly, I held on to the large Science project file in front of my blazer with both my arms crossed across it. 

Morning classes covered Algebra, Art and Maths. Not once did I put my hand up to answer a question. Not once did I ask permission to go to the toilet. I was happy to sit at my desk, slightly bent forward, resting my elbows so that all anyone could see was my face and neck. 

There were times when I straightened up from my desk and looked down at myself, by moving my neck so that my chin touched the hollow of my throat. The roughly pokey mini mounds on either side of my shirt collar made me tingle. I felt beautiful. I felt complete. 

But the newspaper balls will fail me. 

Sanju, my best friend, dragged me out at morning break to play hopscotch with her. 

Instinct is an odd friend. He hangs in the background and doesn’t make a fuss, but you know he’s there. You also know that you should seek him out more often and listen to his soft suggestions more readily. He may not be the most fun or flamboyant one, but he has your back. Despite this, you choose to ignore him and he’s such a wallflower that he disappears easily in the crowd of people around you. You only think of him when the mistake has been made. His presence pricks at your sub-conscience just before the heavy boulders of regret roll in. It’s usually too late by then. 

The scrunched up newspaper balls were secure when I left the sanctuary of my class desk. 

Less than ten minutes later, they will slip and plop out from under my un-tucked shirt, and gape at me from the grey tarmac where the white chalk lines drawn for our game will start to blur and smudge with drops of shame. 

I am *always* able to recall this memory clearly. Each detail is so vivid that whenever the word ‘boobs’ comes up, I can see my friends around me -- friends who stopped playing hopscotch, friends who, first in shock then mockingly, whispered my name and assigned it to the school legend of ‘the- girl-who-wore-fake-boobs-to-school’. They were the same friends who bent down to pick up the scrunched up newspaper balls, held them in *their* hands and took them back to class to show everyone else. My friends never let me forget Bani’s cruelty. 