From: Sidharth Singh <sidharths456@gmail.com>
Date: 28 February 2017 at 13:41
Subject: Submission
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>

“Sidharth Singh was born in London in 1995. He is a musician and a student of literature. He currently resides in Delhi and teaches at Musicology Private Ltd. As a writer he has been to the DumPukht Fiction Writing Workshop, a residency headed by Anil Menon. He has also won awards in several colleges in Delhi University." 


*Silence and Seashells* 

“Quiet types hai, saala.” 

The boys jeered at Omkar. Surrounded and uncomfortable he didn’t know what to do with his little hands or how far apart to keep his feet. He only stood as best he could: awkwardly, his eyes fixed on the ground, trying to weather the bullying. While some of the boys stood with their arms folded and others stood akimbo, all had their chests puffed, for Omkar made them feel big. “Why don’t you say something? Say your name at least?” Alarms blared in Omkar’s head and he barely understood the boy. He willed words from within but they died on their way to the top; he opened his mouth only to stand agape for a few moments and close it. The boys howled with laughter. One even leapt forward, flicked him at the back of his head and leapt back to the safety of numbers. Another pulled his school tie, reducing the knot to the size of a fingernail. But a third only walked up to him with a gait of confidence. “I’ll help you speak.” He grabbed Omkar by the hair. Omkar shouted. “Arrey wah! Some sound at last. Now say your name.” “Omkar!” “Zor se!” “Omkar!” Then, as if kicking a pebble from a path, he aimed a kick at Omkar’s ankle so he fell on his side. “Bhai, at least an introduction you could have managed. Can’t make friends if you’re too quiet for a ‘how do you do.’ ” They all laughed and made their departure. Omkar waited till they were out of sight and got up, pulled his bag onto his shoulders and made his way home, limping and wiping his nose with his sleeve. But the tears dried soon enough; Omkar was used to this treatment. Forehead glued to his class desk, nobody paid him the attention for conversation. Bullies, however, never failed to notice him. Like a gazelle chased by a cheetah he hopped from school to school, hunted. But wherever he went there were more lying in wait. In his fantasies Omkar would never face a bully alone; during lunch breaks he shared his food if not eat someone else’s; or, in the courage of company, skipped class and kicked a ball in the school ground. Sometimes the opportunity for friendship presented itself to Omkar: a new student, unfamiliar with the children of the class, would come up to him. “Hello. Could I borrow a pencil?” Omkar would hand them a pencil and scrutinise their backs, wondering if this warranted friendship. He wondered till the bell jolted him out of his thoughts and the pencil would be handed back with no words exchanged. Omkar would kick a pile of leaves on his way home. *Next time.* But all his pencils found their way back to him and he had not a friend to show. In time everyone knew that Omkar was good for pencils but not much good for company. And all the while his parents tried to decipher his oddity. Omkar’s mother had discussions with his teachers,  her hands tightly clutching her purse while Omkar sat fidgeting next to her. “Madam,” she said, “he has no friends. So many schools we have changed because he gets bullied. Please pay extra attention to  him.” The teacher sat up and straightened her spectacles. “Omkar is a good boy but he is extremely introverted. He needs to be prodded out of his shell.” Omkar looked on in horror as he was signed up for a speech in the next week’s assembly. He spent many nights in front of a mirror, clutching a crumpled piece of paper, and saying “Good morning respected teachers and dear friends.” On the day of the speech his mother kissed him on the cheek and sent him off. Giddy, he wobbled to school and found himself in front of a microphone and a sea of onlooking faces. “Good morning respected teachers and dear friends,” he began. And it was here that he ended. Even the courage to take out his paper he could not muster. Omkar only stood mute; he could not go on. The children roared with laughter and clapped their hands. Omkar was ushered off the stage and later, when he was in the bathroom, bullied by his seniors. His parents were forced to change his school again. Here he was now, limping home to begin the summer vacation, wondering how his parents would react. He rang the bell and his mother opened the door to take in his dishevelled appearance. She brought her palm to her forehead with a smack. “Who did this?” She brought Omkar in and settled him on the couch. “It’s nothing- “No,” she said pointing a finger in his face. “He will not get away with this. Tell me his name.” Omkar sighed. “Amar.” “I have your teacher’s number. I’ll call her.” Later Omkar, with a pillow pressed against his cheek and the smell of iodex in the air, stared at the bar of light under his door, listening to his mother on the phone. “This is absolutely unacceptable, ma’am. On the last day of school this has happened. Please make sure the boy’s parents hear about this. Yes. Yes.” Omkar wished his ankle would never heal, disabling him from going to school. He tried to sleep but his slumber was plagued with nightmares of running in school corridors, chased by bullies.  The mornings were no better. It was for breakfast that he got to see his father the most and the days began with being reprimanded. “This is too much, beta,” he said. “We’ve changed four schools. Four! Learn how to stand up for yourself.” Omkar nodded, swirling a spoon in a bowl of milk. “Yes, papa.” His father resumed cutting into his omelette. “Achcha Jatin chachu is coming for lunch tomorrow so be ready.” Omkar continued swirling his spoon. Brothers, Jatin and Omkar’s father ran a small business together. He lived in Chennai and was a keen swimmer; he swam at his neighbourhood’s club every morning. A man full of stories Omkar, when in good spirits, would sit still as a stone, listening to what he had to say. “When I was in school I went to the beach to miss classes,” Jatin said. “I saved money and bought coconut water and passed time under the sun. But my attendance got low and my teacher began to wonder where I was. Soon enough my father caught wind of my mischief. It was your papa who sold me out; I had been quite the braggart telling him about all the time I was not spending in school. But my father wanted to teach me a lesson , he said nothing and just drove down to the beach the next day. I was trying to count ships in the distance when I turned around and saw him looking about for me.” “What did you do?” “Achcha you tell me what would you have done?” “Apologise,” Omkar replied. “Good boy. But that’s not what I did,” Jatin said with a wink. “He was yet to spot me and was standing in what appeared to be the only way out. So I turned around and embraced the ocean.” “What?” “Yes. I just jumped into the water and held my breath till he was gone. I enjoyed the rest of the day drying up in the sun; I knew it was my last day at the beach. He caught up with me when I went home and I was back at school the next day.” Omkar knew his chacha would come bearing new stories but even this did not lift his spirits; the days had grown sombre. So when the doorbell rang the next day, Omkar was not eagerly waiting. His mother opened the door and his chacha was standing with a briefcase in his hand and a smile on his face. ` “Hello, bhabhi. And hello, Omkar! How are you?” “I’m fine, chachu.” “Come in, come, in.” “Thank you. But hold on a moment; I have a present to give,” he said. Omkar looked on and Jatin took out a small seashell from his pocket. “This is for you, Omkar.” Omkar took it. It was the size of a coin, with one side smooth and white while the other a mix of pink and brown, porous to the touch. “Put it to your ear,” Jatin said. Curious, Omkar obeyed and he heard the resonance of the room. “What is that sound?” “Folklore says it is the sound of the ocean.” “Is it really?” Jatin laughed. “It is just a myth. They do sound similar though. Now you can take the ocean wherever you go.” “Thank you, chachu.” Jatin smiled and made his way towards the living room to have a chat with Omkar’s father. As they exchanged their hellos and handshakes Omkar slipped into his room and, with the seashell in his hand, sat on his bed. He put it to his ear and it whispered to him. With closed eyes he imagined his own private beach inside the shell with waves lapping on the shore. He would lie down in the sun warmed sand while baby turtles scuttled onto his shoulders to nibble his ears as the ocean sang its endless song. As he lay in his room daydreaming and eventually dozing off, Jatin chacha had lunch with the family and made his departure. With the seashell in his hand the days seemed easier to Omkar. When his mother nagged him to go outside to play cricket and make friends, all he had to do was put the shell to his ear and tune her out. He began spending most of the day in his fantasy beach, with turtles and crabs. And at night, wrapped in a blanket, he had the seashell to his ear still, drifting off to sleep listening to its sound, as if it were a lullaby sung by a mother to her child. But this obsession did not sit well with his real mother. It was as if her son had grown a seashell for an ear. “Oho! Put it down. Go out and make some friends and play or you’ll grow fat just lazing around.” Omkar said nothing and she seethed in his ignorance. “Lete reh! God knows what will become of you. You want to pass time then do something productive.” But Omkar was having a good time: his anxieties of school and friends had all but drowned in the ocean. Alas his mother could no longer bear her son, already being a loner, being a loafer too. So when she found the seashell in Omkar’s room she thought it best to keep it with herself. Omkar’s hand, now trained by instinct, went for the seashell on his table and he was stunned by the feel of coarse wood. Days of wailing, complaining and pulling at dupattas had no effect on his mother. Omkar pleaded with his father too but to no avail. He was forced to give up and sit with arms folded on the couch, contemplating the point of life. His mother almost laughed at the sight of him but managed to keep her chuckle behind pursed lips. “It’s just a seashell, baba.” He said nothing. “Achcha what if I told you we are going to Chennai next week? And you can collect as many seashells you want at the beach?” He smiled. 

*** Omkar frowned as he walked out the airport. Expecting to be blown away by a breeze from the Bay of Bengal lying at his feet, he stood, instead, firmly on the ground, one hand in each parent’s hand, looking at taxis hurtling away and people hurrying here and there. There was no ocean in sight. “Jatin!” his father called. Jatin turned around on hearing his brother’s voice. They all exchanged greetings and he led them to his car and began booting the luggage. “Let’s head home,” he said. The car’s engine revved and Omkar sat with his face pressed up against the window. The airport rolled out of the frame and he hoped the ocean would take its place. “I’ll take you there soon enough,” Jatin said looking in the rear view mirror. “Let’s drop bhaiya and bhabhi first. Do you still have the seashell?” “Yes,” Omkar replied clutching the seashell in his pocket. They made their way through the roads of Chennai and parked in Jatin’s garage. The house was painted a sandy yellow so it almost looked like a piece of the beach against the blue of an open sky. They got out of the car and unloaded the luggage. “Should I take Omkar out to the beach? You can rest till then.” “Yes, yes,” Omkar’s mother replied. “Yes!” Jatin smiled as he took his car keys again. The drive, though shorter than the last, was made long by Omkar’s impatience. After much shifting in his seat and craning his neck the car finally came to a halt and he hopped out. He could see the vast and open sky in the distance trying to come down almost as if to swallow the Earth. “Come,” Jatin said. They made their way towards the beach, walking on a cemented path with palm trees on either side. The concrete gave way to sand and the Bay of Bengal finally made itself visible, the entire ocean coming seemingly out of nowhere. A cool ocean breeze blew into their faces as they walked closer to the water. They stood in silence for a considerable length, listening to the water rising and crashing down on itself only to come rushing on to land before seeping back into the ocean. There was nobody on the beach for great stretches of distance and so, aside from the ocean, there was nothing to be heard. It was quiet. Omkar took out the seashell and put it to his ear. “Sounds the same thoda sa,” he said breaking the silence. Jatin laughed. “Let’s go closer. Take off your shoes and roll up your trousers.” Omkar did and held his chacha’s hand. They walked closer and waited for the water to touch their feet. After shying away a few times the water suddenly gushed around their ankles and Omkar’s heart leapt. The water went several feet behind them and, for a moment, it seemed as if they were standing in the middle of the ocean. The water retreated taking some sand with it and Omkar felt the beach shift beneath his feet. It filled him with thrill and joy and they stood a great while, hand in hand, laughing as the water came again and again. They kicked water up at each other and spent a while collecting seashells for Omkar. “Come now. We should be heading back,” Jatin said. The sky had grown darker and the winds more frequent. They returned to the car and began their journey back, this time with the headlights on and a sense of ease about them. “So you had fun na?” “Yes, chachu.” “You want to come for a swim tomorrow? I go to the club every morning.” “I can’t swim.” “Arrey no problem. You’re here for the whole summer. I’ll teach you. What do you say?” Taken by the idea Omkar looked at the seashells he had collected. He sat back and imagined swimming in the ocean, accompanied by a school of swirling sardines and sea turtles. “I would like to learn, chachu.” “We’ll start tomorrow then,” Jatin said. “I’ll wake you up at six.” “So early,” Omkar groaned. “Yes. Promise to follow my instruction, I can promise to make you a swimmer. Who knows? Maybe one day you’ll be swimming in the ocean too. One thing is for certain though,” Jatin said. “What’s that?” “Water will be your friend for life.” 

The next few weeks were not as easy Omkar thought they would be. After witnessing the infinity of the ocean the symmetry of a swimming pool looked much less daunting. But the next few weeks were the most gruelling of his childhood. For the first few days he only held his breath underwater and did stationary strokes as Jatin held him level with the water.  But even this proved to be taxing. When Jatin woke him up in the morning his limbs were too sore to pull his blanket off, and yet, he would be taking dunks in the water a short while later. And when he began to do widths of the pool the water felt stiff. He was a foreigner in this country, unaccustomed to its ways. But the dreams of maritime adventures persisted and his limbs grew stronger; his arms stopped slapping the water to meet resistance but flowed into it with a steadily increasing acceptance. The water loosened around him and Omkar began swimming the pool’s length. Jatin, watching and guiding, clocked him in on a shorter time every passing day. Finally a day came when Omkar swam the pool’s length in his shortest time. “Shabaash,” Jatin said. Jatin’s phone rang and, as he retreated to answer it, Omkar kicked away to the middle of the pool, floating face down with arms wide open almost as if to hug the water. His ears were submerged so he heard nothing; there was only the blue and quiet slowness of the water. Omkar smiled and the water seemed to hug him back. It felt good to be quiet in the company of a friend. *** “Open your notebooks and copy the equation.” The children obeyed. In the bustle of hands rummaging through bags the teacher turned towards the blackboard and the tapping and hissing of chalk on slate was added to the mix. The teacher sidled across the blackboard and Omkar copied more of the equation. “Excuse me, ma’am,” a student said appearing at the door. “Ah,” the teacher said. “Come in. Class this is Nitin, he is a new admission. How do we make him feel welcome?” “Hello, Nitin,” they replied. The teacher looked about for an empty seat. “Sit over there. I’ll help you catch up after class.” Nitin sat next to Omkar and smiled. He turned to take out his notebook and upon turning back found Omkar with a hand put forward. “Hello, my name is Omkar. Nice to meet you.” 