From: Lahari Mahalanabish <lahari.mahalanabish@gmail.com>
Date: 12 November 2017 at 15:13
Subject: SUBMISSION
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Dilemma 

Padma could feel the warmth of the noodles in her hands as she wrapped the square, pink Tiffin box with a checked napkin, knotted it and tucked in a blue plastic fork. Picking up the red water-bottle with the green strap, she shook it to check whether she had filled it up already. As her eyes caught the clock on the dining room shelf she rushed to her bedroom mirror to mask the shadows of her fatigue with a few strokes of the blusher. Punching a *kalka* shaped *bindi* on her forehead, she drew out her leather purse from the unlocked wardrobe and found that only a few ten rupee notes were left. Those were enough for the day: she would ask her husband for a couple of hundred rupees notes once he returned at night. 

Padma’s daughter Anshu pricked out a piece of green chilly from her omelette and held it aloft before her brother Aryan’s eager eyes. Aryan, who was just three years older than her and possessed diametrically opposite food habits, snatched it from her fork. Slipping a finger underneath the top bread of his sandwich, he added it to the tiny rings of chilly sprinkled on the white fibres of boiled chicken and chewed his breakfast with relish. He hated eggs and Anshu could not stand the taste of chicken. 

“Hurry up. Hurry up,” Padma called out while unzipping her children’s school bags to check whether they had packed all the books and exercise copies as per their respective timetables: she did not want them to suffer the humiliation of standing outside the classroom for an entire period. Once her children were done with their breakfast, she lowered their empty plates into the kitchen sink, which was already crammed with piles of soiled utensils. She had no time for them now: she could tackle them only after dropping her children to school. At least, she did not have to spread old newspapers near the school gates and sit there for hours like many other Moms, who chaperoned their children back home. Her younger brother-in-law, who was still enslaved by sleep, would be ready by then to mount his bike and whizz to the school to pick them up. 

As usual, before leaving Padma turned to the corner of the room where a small, burnished, cuboid projected out from the wall like a balcony. It was from this wooden block that the Gods and Goddesses surveyed her family. The smell of incense still hung in the air, occasionally triggering her nostrils to first twitch and then flare to let out a loud and wet sneeze. She took a moment to contemplate the effect of the fresh blossoms she had clustered at the deities’ feet before closing her eyes to seek their blessings. Then clutching Anshu’s hand, she hurried towards the bus-stop, often on the verge of tripping while trying to keep pace with Aryan, who almost galloped along the bustling street. 

They did not have to wait long for bus number 22. Loping to the door of the vehicle, she paused to watch her children climb safely into it. Then a sudden excitement gripped her as she hitched up her sari a wee bit to raise her leg and land on the steps of the bus. Will *he* be there today? 

The seats always got filled up at the bus terminus itself. Padma and her children squeezed themselves between the front seat and the partition behind the driver’s seat. Extricating Anshu from the bulky schoolbag, her mother looked expectantly at the seated passengers near them. A bespectacled lady caught her gaze and nodded with a half smile. She placed the bag on her lap, encircled it with both arms, closed her eyes and dozed off. Padma spotted *him* through the many human figurines pillaring in between as soon as she had lifted her gaze to steal a glance at the passengers jostling at the back. 

He was tall, with his luxurious crop of hair almost caressing the bus ceiling. He was strong too: during the nasty brakes most passengers would lurch forward despite gripping on to the rods; he would remain standing steadily, his fingers lightly resting on the back of a seat. 

Padma had noticed him for the first time, when they were standing close by and he had bent down to squeeze Anshu’s chubby cheeks. On another day, he had offered her children toffees –  chocolate coated ones wrapped in polka dotted cellophane. Padma, who habitually never allowed her gaze to linger on unknown men, had smiled courteously, with her eyes lowered while Aryan had thanked him. She remembered watching Anshu twist the edges of the wrapper to slip out the brown toffee, pop it into her mouth and suck it with relish while crumpling the cellophane. The little one had fiddled with the wrapper throughout the journey before disposing it off in a military green dustbin near her school. The day after, Padma had beamed at him out of politeness: this time looking him in the eye, and he had flashed a good-natured grin. Padma could not tell what was in his smile that had spellbound her and shrouded her in a confusing cloud of bliss and painful longing. With his chiselled face, height and lean physique, there was no doubt that he was a most attractive specimen of his sex, but with so many handsome men Padma passed by everyday – even her husband was not bad looking despite the bald patch – she was clueless as to why she was reacting to him. 

As the bus approached another stoppage many of the men standing near him started to straggle towards the door. With the human curtain between them thinned, he noticed Padma for the first time today, and as she had expected he greeted her with a radiant smile. Her lips parted at once and for a few priceless moments she remained connected to him through their smiles – the two curves like two valleys in time, which had swerved back to face itself, while same-route buses adamantly competed, tucked away mobile phones rang out loudly, crowds swelled in muddy, open markets and queues snaked at paved bus terminuses. The sting in her heart went on to stretch, reaching a sharp point till she found herself ripped up by an unrelenting onslaught of desire. 

Padma imagined herself with him in Fiona Cafe, a stone’s throw away from CareHome Hospital. Once in six months, she would treat herself to the crunchy cutlets and piping hot cardamom tea on her way home from the healthcare centre where she had worked as an admin staff: a job she had quit years ago to accommodate the ever increasing demands of wifely and motherly duties. She could almost feel the softness of the round, velvet cushions against her overstrained back as she spoke to him in hushed tones between sips of flavoured tea. Then an image of a curtained room sailed into her mind but it instantly began to quiver like a boat in a storm as she succumbed to her shyness. Nevertheless, it left her with a bright smile, which she promptly hid under the folds of her pursed lips lest she was mistaken for a crazy woman smiling to herself. 

What if she could have him for a day or even if for an hour to herself? A transient but overwhelming gift from fate for all the dishes she had rustled up at an unnerving speed, the towering piles of utensils she had rinsed and the mounds of dumped clothes she had washed. Couldn’t she enjoy a reward for all the sleepless nights she had nursed her ailing in-laws, even though she knew they would abuse her soon after regaining enough strength to unfurl their viciousness? What about a brief escape from all the tantrums thrown by her children every day? Under compulsion to fit in more and more chores in the limited span of time, each day twisted up like a wrung cloth; the water droplet-moments she could squeeze out had to be siphoned off for her husband’s multi-faceted thirsts. What about a balm for all those insufferable weekend afternoons when her husband tried out the tricks he had learned from porn sites? She was supposed to enjoy them as his friends claimed that their wives did. His friends figured often in their conversations. At least, that was a respite from the rebukes for quitting her job when all the other women in the world and possibly outer space were managing both home and career with unquestionable expertise. 

The bus screeched to a halt behind a car with an L pasted on its back window. Missiles of abuses from her co-passengers flew past her ears as the lady in the driver’s seat took time to start her brand new car. But weren’t her children her greatest rewards? A raspy voice gave the final spin to the questions that had been churning since long. Withdrawing her hand from the rod, she pulled out a plain, white, unembroidered kerchief from her bag and wiped the sweat off her face. The raspy voice picked up pitch - wasn’t she stepping beyond the line that distinguished between need and greed? The voice gained and gained in volume till it was as loud as bomb explosions, scattering away even the most resilient thoughts. As the gleaming car finally glided ahead, the bus once again geared up for the race with a growl. 

The ‘reward’ would also have a mind of his own. More streams of sweat trailed her throat and pooled in her round bra cups as she wondered how the man would react if he could know about her feelings. Though Padma had ceased to be the babe she was in college, sometimes light and shade would creep up in an unique patchwork to haul her out of the rubble of the overspent years. Before any hope could spurt that he might fancy her too another thought burst into her mind. For whom was he carrying those lozenges? Just like her, he might be someone’s spouse and someone’s parent too. 

Noticing a lady, with henna dyed hair, stir up in her seat, Padma grabbed her daughter’s hand, collected her school bag from the dozing woman’s lap and surreptitiously inched towards the place being vacated, unwilling to alert the other passengers to it. As the middle aged lady, burdened with two heavy bags, stood up and wriggled past a man, her face creasing with the effort, Anshu promptly slid into her place. Now Padma was so close to him that she was even scared to look in his direction lest he suspected something. Instead, she turned to the nearest window: her eyes fell on a white temple with a sharp pointed spire, and pillars that widened at the middle and were etched all over with intricate carvings of lions and clawed birds. Although, there were no bus-stops or traffic signals nearby, the bus braked all of a sudden. The passengers sitting at the front followed the driver’s gaze to spot the black cat languidly ambling down the road. Though Padma passed the temple everyday and always caught a fleeting glimpse of the stone idols inside, for the first time her gaze arched along the curve of the bloodied scimitar and knocked against the severed heads garlanding Goddess Kali. What if she brought upon punishment for herself with her unbridled thoughts? What if the chastisement came in the form of something horrible happening to her children? 

As the bus raced to another stoppage, Padma felt many brushes – most of them unintentional – against her pronounced derriere as men, women and children shoved their way towards the door. She knew that one of the moving bodies belonged to her fancy man: out of the corner of her eyes, she had noticed him shift from his position to take a step towards where she was standing. In his case, she was doubly sure that the scraping of their clothes was purely accidental: the figure blazing in her ardour could not be a molester. 

A couple of stoppages later, she would alight as well, one hand clutching her daughter, the other clasping the slightly frayed handbag, her eyes fixed on her son, her buttocks still tingling with the guilty thrill of an accidental brush, and her mind curdled by fear, perforated by searing questions, swamped with unchallenged beliefs, yet fuzzy with inexplicable desire. 

Brief Biography 

Lahari Mahalanabish is a software engineer by profession. Her book of poems entitled *One Hundred Poems *had been published by Writers Workshop, India. Her short stories have appeared in The Bombay Review, Muse India, Himal Southasia, Indian Review, The Criterion, Ashvamegh..The Literary Flight, The Statesman, The Asian Age and forthcoming in The Bangalore Review. Some of her poems have found place in Yellow Chair Review, Poets Online, Saw, The Statesman and The Hans India. She lives in Kolkata, India with her three year old daughter, husband and parents. She blogs at http://theserpentacursedrhyme.blogspot.in/ . 