From: Avishek Parui <avishekparui@iitm.ac.in>
Date: 24 December 2017 at 18:48
Subject: Submission
To: "outofprintmagazine@gmail.com" <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>

*The Return* 

A Short Story by Avishek Parui 

As soon as he heard the clink of the tram passing beneath his window, he stood up to pack the final bits. It was time. His wall clock showed 1PM. Its hands had stopped moving about 10 hours back, its battery having died away. But he knows when trams passed along Wellington Street beneath his window and knew it was time enough now. The room looked tidied up, the empty rum bottles stood in a corner, staring at him like little playmates left behind by someone who has awkwardly abandoned the game, the papers were piled up in a neat heap on the writing table; the weight of his bronze Buddha on them. Despite the closed windows, the December cold had clawed up the bricks of his room; a single-room apartment in Central Calcutta where the patches on walls grinned like faces in the dark. He stared at those. Until one patch looked like the bird he had killed when he was 8. Slowly, he found himself smelling his first memory of death. 

Theirs was the last house in a long blind lane in North Calcutta; standing where a small swamp began its thick pool of wild shrubs and thorny stems. He had seen some young men from their neighbourhood hide in that swamp when the police came into their lane. They often came, the police, looking for men who were called Naxals. He was 8 then, he was instructed to never speak to the policemen, and, if they ever asked him anything, to just say he doesn’t know and walk away. He had already seen real guns by then, pistols carried by young men in their North Calcutta neighbourhood. He had already known that many men in their lane had been shot and killed. Apparently they were captured and put in police vans, then taken to big fields where they were asked to run away. They were shot from behind. “Young men’s lives don’t cost much these days” he often heard his elders say. 

A distant uncle who was in the Calcutta Police had gifted a gun to him on his birthday, a steel airgun that always felt cold when he pressed his palms against it. It had small iron pellets for bullets and went off with a kick that thrust his small shoulders back. It was a warm May afternoon in North Calcutta.  He had spotted the pigeon as it sat quietly on the washing line in the middle of their terrace and had taken aim. He had imagined himself as a policeman, the bird as a Naxal. Their old terrace had become the big field where Naxals were asked to run. Before being shot from behind. He did not want to hurt the bird really; he just wanted to see what happened when he hit a living body harder than he could imagine. The airgun zipped across the evening air and pushed him backwards as he pulled the trigger. The pigeon had not moved. He saw it fall like a thick lump with a thud that ate up all sounds of distant bus-horns from the main street. After about four seconds, it began to leak blood as it started wriggling its wings. He went up to it slowly and unsurely with his hockey-stick, fearing it would attack him. It looked much larger, heavier; as it lay on the terrace floor in a growing pool of thick blood, panting for the air that was leaving it. He saw its breaths rise and fall under a violet North-Calcutta sky where aging terraces rubbed shoulders stretching as far as his eyes could go. Standing near the ledge of their old terrace where the twilight hung over his shoulders; he stared at the death he had brought to life. The pigeon was leaking blood, weakening; dying very slowly before his eyes. With short breaths that sounded like heavy footsteps over crushed grass. He may have stood there for an hour seeing the bird move into its death; sinking into something he did not know. It kept growing before him; as the bird grew feebler, until it grew still. 

Suddenly it was dark. The terraces on either side looked like shadowy faces brooding over his act. He felt as if all the dead young men in their neighbourhood, Naxals who had been shot by the police, were looking at him, blaming him with their bloodied fatigued faces. Young men who had played cricket in their narrow neighbourhood lane. He realized he had killed something; something that breathed before he had taken aim. The knowledge was clinically complete, it stuck to his skin like cold sweat. He stared at the dead pigeon and wondered why it had grown so big and heavy. He must have been a dwarf beside it under the violet sky. The walls of the terraces around with the dead men’s faces seemed to be closing in on him.  He did not know how long he stood there watching the dead bird grow before him; until he dragged it along the floor with his hockey-stick to where their brick wall had broken off and opened into a slice of sky. He panted as he pushed the pigeon along; for it was growing heavier each second. He didn’t know how long it took him to reach the wall where the bricks had broken away. The mouth of the dead bird gaped wider each time he looked at it. He tried very hard not to look. It seemed to suck him into the blackness between its beaks; the air around him smelt a lot like when the dead men’s mothers cried. They often cried. He felt a chill creep up his feet, his sweat mixing with the black blood that formed a thick line as he pushed the dead bird along the crusty terrace floor. It might have taken an hour till he reached the broken bricks. He pushed the body as it grew before him, through the broken bricks; turned and ran down the stairs so as not to hear it plunge into the swamp-pool where hunted men often hid. When he saw it last, the pigeon was in mid-air; a giant corpse produced out of his Naxal-policeman game, with a grey glint that was eating up the sky; its eyes glistening like two massive stones and its beaks shaping into a grin. That was how he has always had to remember the bird; that, he realized in retrospect, was its revenge on his mind for playing the policeman who took its life. He never saw it fall; just heard a sharp swish chasing him as he ran down the stairs of their old three-storied house. 

His mother was calling out to him from the stairs; shouting that it was 7 already and he ought to begin his homework. He was too afraid to be guilty; afraid of what he had seen growing before him. He knew he never wanted to kill the pigeon. He remembered its last living eyes falling on him; its killer, with a heavy gaze that choked him as it wriggled with its growing wings. At 8, he had seen how death looked like; smelt its growing and writhing flesh that fills a dying body. He had seen how death stares back grinning in gratitude at the one who brings it to life. At 8, he knew how it felt to kill. Each time he thought of it, the pigeon felt fleshier. It was a giant corpse now with massive eyes that stared at him sometimes when there wasn’t light enough to hide. 

The pages of *Roadmaps *lay before him now like the body of the dying pigeon. It’s the novel he had wanted to write. It’s the novel he could not write. Maybe it was dead already and he just had to push it through the broken bricks soon. Just like he had pushed the dead bird.  Of course it had to happen this way. He stared at his black typewriter that looked like the bird before he had taken aim. Another tram was clinking beneath his window as he got up and walked to the metal box of keys he made love to as he wrote. It had grown old; his typewriter. But unlike the pigeon, it had grown weaker with time; feebler in its metal strength. Of course he had never fed it enough with words. When he touched it tenderly he felt something push itself quickly up his throat, till he blocked it where it began to thicken into a lump.  He picked his typewriter and went to his window, a long glassless opening on the wall with wooden blinds that overlooked Wellington Street. He stood smelling the cold nightair looking at the closed cinema hall across the road, then lifted his typewriter as high as he could and hurled it out of his window. He saw it hang for some time before it began to sink. He saw it stare back at him from mid-air, not like the way the bird had done half a century ago; but with the eyes of something sad as well as relieved to end. To find its peace. Nobody was calling him out this time. His mother had long been dead. Like almost everyone else. Like almost everything else. He did not want to run away from this sound of fall. When he heard his typewriter smash against the stones in the cobbled street below, he thought of four more words he could have written in it. A pseudo-conclusion to his unfinished novel. *Roadmap.* 

I. 

Failed. 

To. 

Find. 

The sounds down below sliced open the skin of the night and he saw the lights slant out from a window beneath his floor and one across the street; curious to know what had happened. They probably thought it’s a madman’s gig.  The typewriter below was breaking with a clatter of keys, hammering away all the words he could not write. When the sounds stopped there must have been a sad story down there that thinned away fast into the nervous nightair. 

He leaned out of the window to see how it had ended. A clink was dimming across the distance. A tram was moving away. He closed his eyes and let the lump in his throat become a stifled scream. At the heart of a dying dream. He felt himself moving into a cold closure that will not ask any more questions. He was now free to fall. He did not know for how long he stood beside his long window, remembering all the events that did not happen. Remembering with his slowing body, his spent sinews, his limp limbs. The missed chances, the fragile fantasies, the unwritten words, the undone bits. The figures flashed up and flickered with other images in the changing sky. Everything merged, moved and mixed. Like slow cinema. Where lights break in softly from the corners of the frame. He looked at the old sad cinema hall across the road that had been shut down, about to be turned to a shopping mall. He saw himself, his memories, on a massive movie screen. The hall’s final film. The stars in the sky were beginning to dim. With the smell of another day swimming in. He waited till he heard the first bird cry. Soon after he heard the first phone ring. 

He walked back slowly and swallowed the pills. Hoping to sink into sleep. A deep sleep that he hoped will cuddle him in like a warm cave. When he wakes up, he thought, lying in his bed and staring at his still ceiling fan, it will be into another day where everything will look the same but will smell a little different. Without words to write. Without a story to type. This made him laugh. Slowly at first but then so hard that he nearly cried. 

*____________________* 

Author Bio: 

Avishek Parui (avishekparui@iitm.ac.in) (http://avishekparui.wixsite. com/webpage) is Assistant Professor in English at the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, and Associate Fellow of the UK Higher Education Academy, having done his PhD in English Studies from Durham University. He researches and has published academic articles on masculinity studies, memory studies and embodiment. He is also a published poet, short fiction writer and creative writing resource person trained and certified by the British Council. 

Dr Avishek Parui Assistant Professor (English) Department of Humanities and Social Sciences Alumni Avenue Indian Institute of Technology Madras http://avishekparui.wixsite.com/webpage 