From: Niyantha Shekar <niyantha@outlook.com>
Date: 2 January 2018 at 21:42
Subject: submission
To: "outofprintmagazine@gmail.com" <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>


*27 Hours to California* 

*Niyantha Shekar* 

“What’s the first exit to take?” 

They had been driving for 30 minutes on a highway they had to be on forever, almost 15 hours on the road before they could call it a night at Flagstaff. And then another 12 hours the next day to reach San Jose where Sundar, who had a Masters degree in Electrical Engineering from the University of Texas but no green card, had the best chance of finding a job. It was November 1983 and the Thanksgiving weekend – when everyone, including all hiring managers, would be on vacation – was just a week away. Every day had to be productive. Every dollar – they had only $400 left – had to be carefully spent. 

The first exit was a long way off, but Revathi rummaged through the glove box anyway to check the map and ease Sundar’s nerves. Since his graduation that summer, Sundar had spent most of his time in the university library scanning job listings in the newspaper and mailing out applications. His grades were excellent, and he had experience working as an engineer in India. But that mattered little to Texan employers who didn’t want to sponsor work visas. And so, days and weeks went by with no interview calls. Eventually, the visits to the library became less frequent and he started to spend more hours at home, sullen and silent. 

Revathi, whose dependent visa didn’t allow her to apply for a job, encouraged Sundar to keep trying. On particularly bad days when he barely acknowledged her presence she would probe him, like in a game of 20 Questions, to find out what the problem was. He would then end the game by snapping at her, “Can’t you just let me be?” It wasn’t like she didn’t feel the stress of a rapidly declining bank balance. But she knew someone had to project calm. So, she internalized anything negative in those early months of their marriage, and even pawned off some of her jewellery to help make rent. And it was Revathi who finally convinced Sundar that they pack up and move to California. 

“My father’s cousin, Mohan mama, lives in San Jose. He’ll know people you can interview with,” she had told Sundar. “He’ll host us too.” 

As Sundar gunned their used, faded-yellow Toyota Corolla down US-183 N, cold air rushed through her window that wouldn’t fully shut and sent strands of her hair flying. From the glove box, she pulled out insurance documents, receipts, candy bar wrappers, Sundar’s old engineering assignments, and copies of their passports. 

“The maps aren’t here,” she said. 

“They *have* to be there,” Sundar said, his eyes darting from the road to the mess of papers in his wife’s hands. 

“Are you sure you kept them in the car?” she asked, rummaging some more. 

“Of course I did! Who goes on a trip like this without a map?” 

Clearly we do, Revathi thought as she stuffed everything back in the glove box. And then she reminded herself to stay calm. From the small apartment that they had just vacated, she would often hear her neighbour shout, “Let’s rewind!” whenever her kid lost a toy. “Where did you last see it?” the neighbour would then ask with a patience that impressed Revathi. 

“Let’s rewind,” Revathi said, as she saw annoyance settle on Sundar’s face. “Where did you last see the maps?” 

“I had them in my hand when we walked out of the apartment.” 

“Yes, I remember you had the maps in one hand and the thermos in the other.” 

“I placed the maps and the thermos on top of the car as we loaded the suitcases.” 

“Well, the thermos is here,” Revathi said, holding up a light-brown flask of coffee. “Did you leave the maps—” 

“Faaack,” he said, slackening his grip on the steering wheel. Revathi giggled at the disappointed drawl. The men in American movies always uttered the word with a more striking energy. 

“You find this funny?” he asked, upping the gear in anger. 

“It’s okay. We can take this exit and pick up another set of maps at a gas station.” 

He abruptly cut a minivan on the right lane and took the exit.  “What’s another dollar down the drain?” 

They made their lunch stop a few hours later at Lubbock, which appeared to Revathi like any other Texan town with its strip malls, chain stores, and houses that didn’t dare look too different from each other. The gas station toilets too seemed to follow a template: cramped and stinky. No more coffee, she decided, as she walked out of the restroom, adjusting the two sweaters she wore on top of her sari. Sundar, who had finished eating while Revathi was in the restroom, tapped on the steering wheel as she chowed down the idlis that she had packed for the drive. 

“You know we can take an extra day to do this trip,” she said. “Let’s not push ourselves too hard.” 

He remained silent, simply tapping the wheel in response. 

The terrain they drove through that afternoon was flat, brown and bland. The radio didn’t work. Sundar wasn’t talking. Reading a book in a moving vehicle gave her a headache. So Revathi occupied herself by looking at the license plates of the cars ahead and counting the number of different states she could recognize. Texas, Arizona, Oklahoma, New York… New York? What was someone from New York doing all the way down here? 

From a young age, her father had impressed upon her that New York City was the greatest place in the world. He had visited the city once in the late 60s during a sales trip, and had brought back a few souvenirs for her, including a Statue of Liberty key-chain that now brushed Sundar’s knee as it dangled off the car-key. Her father felt that New York City was great for two reasons: its people walked with urgency and purpose, and its buildings were so tall that he had sprained his neck looking up at them. 

Austin, the college town in Texas that they had lived in, had disappointed her on both counts. Their cramped studio apartment was in a sleepy student community where the residents ambled to class in the clothes they wore to bed. And those who had graduated to the real world lived in suburbs that were united by a dulling sameness. “It’s a cookie cutter world here,” Sundar had warned when their flight from India hovered over Austin. From her window seat, she saw matchbox-sized cars zooming along crisscrossing highways drawn between grids of houses with unfenced lawns in front and shimmering blue swimming pools behind. 

She didn’t know what to expect from California, though. Mohan mama, whose house they were heading to, was in truth a distant relative whom she hadn’t seen or spoken to in years. He may not even remember her. So, it didn’t help matters that he had no idea they were coming. Sundar had assumed she had called him, but Revathi couldn’t bear the possibility of Mohan mama saying anything but, “You’re welcome to stay here as long as you want.” 

For months, she had bottled inside the stress of Sundar’s employment situation, her own boredom from sitting at home all day, and the various daily aches of marriage. There just wasn’t enough space for more disappointment. As the sun came down, and the temperature dropped even further, it felt unbelievable to Revathi that it had come to this: two college graduates driving 1900 miles across three states to a house they could be turned away from. 

They both skipped dinner – the packed idlis, frozen hard, were inedible – and chose to spend their dollars on hot cups of coffee instead. Sundar would take a few sips of the coffee and hand Revathi the cup to warm her hands. She then placed her palms on her icy ears to thaw them out. She worried that the onslaught of cold winds through her window might just snap off her ears. Sundar combated the cold with a monkey-cap that he had bought during their one-day honeymoon in Kodaikanal, and a shawl that Revathi had spun around his neck. Along with his unkempt stubble and thick moustache, he reminded her of one of those typical Hindi-movie highway robbers. 

As the clock ticked past midnight and the temperature dropped to zero, Revathi felt her body shutting down. She didn’t feel a persistent pang to empty her bladder. Her ears must have snapped off. The sign that said Flagstaff was 20 miles away seemed like a cruel joke; what was to say she’d survive the next five? 

She was hallucinating for sure, the white lane markers suddenly moving away from her, as if the road was being pulled out from beneath them like a carpet. What was Sundar seeing? Was the world drifting for him too? When she turned towards him, she realized that he wasn’t seeing anything. He was asleep. 

“SUNDAR!” 

He woke up to the scream and slammed his foot on the brake. The car spun twice, the sound of screeching tires in their ears, boxes and suitcases slamming against each other and sliding in between the couple, and then silence as if nothing had happened at all. Except, their car stood on the precipice of a ditch a few feet to the right of the metallic shoulder. A pick-up truck drove past, its headlights illuminating a stunned Sundar. Any faster and the truck would have slammed into them on their second spin. 

“We almost died,” Revathi said, the smell of burnt rubber filling her nostrils. “We almost died, Sundar.” 

Sundar got out and assessed the damage. He ran his gloved hand along the back bumper that had come loose. He had spent $2000 to buy the Corolla; money hard – and illegally – earned over months of working overnight shifts at a motel in Austin during the first year of his Masters program. The owner of the motel was originally from Calcutta and had ‘hired’ several Indian grad students over the years to man the reception desk and do odd jobs for less than minimum wage. But it was still money, and Sundar needed it. So he whitewashed stained walls, fixed faulty refrigerators and leaky air-conditioners. But most of his time was spent sitting in the reception desk, the security shutter rolled down in front for protection. There were a few drunk, unruly customers who spit slurs at him, but for the most part Sundar felt safe inside the cage, perfecting the art of falling asleep on a chair. 

“Do you not hear me?” Revathi yelled, stepping out of the car. “Why are we rushing? Will you magically find a job just because we get to California a day early? What the hell is wrong with you?” 

“What is wrong with me?” he asked, snapping back to the present. There was a fury in his eyes that frightened her, but she held her ground. 

“Did we have to get to Flagstaff tonight? We should have checked into a hotel at least two hours ago. ” 

“You think I don’t know that!” he said, aiming a kick at the tire and missing. 

Revathi leaned against the door and hugged herself tightly for warmth as Sundar walked away indignantly. When he returned, anger still ran hot through his veins. 

“You think I don’t know that I could have killed us?” he said. “You think I don’t know that I’m a failure? I had a stable job in Madras. I had savings. I gave it all up to come here. And for what joy? So that I could go into debt and not be able to pay it back? So that I could marry you, pay rent with your jewellery, and then almost kill you?” 

“It would have been too elaborate a plot for murder,” she deadpanned. 

“Will you stop joking around!” 

“Do you think I don’t feel bad about all of this?” she asked, pushing him away. “I was a teacher in Madras before we got married. I liked my job. I was good at it. And now I sit at home all day. You, at least, can apply for a job!” 

They stared at each other while another car passed them by. 

“But I know that we can’t change our situation,” Revathi continued. “So, let’s calm down, please.” 

“I just can’t pretend like everything is okay.” 

He set off another walk, hands on his head. When he returned, he looked broken, a despondent man who didn’t know how to make it in a world that seemed to owe him no favour. With his dishevelled hair, slumped shoulders, and the dark circles under his eyes he looked wearier than any 29-year-old should. 

“I can’t do this anymore, Revathi. I’m tired of writing and rewriting my resume, sending it to every Tom, Dick and Harry and waiting for the phone to ring. The other day I was telling one of my American college-mates about us moving to California. And do you know what he said? ‘Ah, now that’s the American dream.’ I wanted to give him a tight slap and ask what part of our life felt like a dream to him. I topped my classes while he barely passed. And now he’s sound asleep in his apartment with a job to wake up to. Where are we? On some god forsaken highway in the middle of the night shivering—” 

Revathi stunned Sundar into silence with a hug. Cars sped past as they held each other in the glow of their car’s headlights. 

“I’m exhausted, Revathi.” 

“Let’s get back in the car, Sundar,” she whispered, holding him tight. “We’re not too far from Flagstaff.” 

They drove till they spotted a motel. $10 for a dimly lit room rank with the smell of cigarettes. Revathi sat on the edge of the bed, put off by the stained bed sheet and pillow covers. Sleep beckoned, but when she shut her eyes, the images of their spinning car shocked her awake. A few minutes later, Sundar called out to her from the bathroom where he had readied a hot water bath. She let him undress her, her feet trembling on the cold tile floor, and lead her into the tub. 

“This will help,” Sundar said and walked out. 

In a minute, her senses started to come back to life. She leaned her neck against the cool ceramic, only her head bobbing above the water. She didn’t know how long she was asleep for, just that the water was chilly when she opened her eyes again. She quickly dried herself with a towel, which was also stained, and re-wore her sari. Sundar had fallen asleep with the remote in his hand. She turned off the T.V., and climbed in beside him. The next thing she knew Sundar was tapping her awake, asking her to get ready for breakfast. 

*** 

“I feel good,” Sundar said with a smile, as Revathi stared, drowsy-eyed, at the arid Arizona landscape. They had hit the road early that morning after gulping down free breakfast at the motel and slyly stuffing some muffins in Revathi’s handbag for lunch. There was chill in the air, and the constant soundtrack of the rattling back bumper, but the clear blue sky seemed to lift Sundar’s spirits. 

“I feel good about my chances in California,” he said, reaching out to take Revathi’s hand. “I don’t know why, but I feel good.” 

The last time he had held her hand was during the final days of his Masters program. It had only been a few weeks since they had gotten married in Madras – a quickly arranged ceremony conducted in time for his return to the US for his final exams – and she, still jetlagged, had felt uncomfortable staying alone in their apartment while he pulled all-nighters in the lab. So, while he studied, she sat in a corner of the lab poring over a GMAT textbook. And with the sky still dark, and the sun an hour from rising, they would walk back home slowly, yawning, holding hands. 

They slowly revealed their pasts to each other during those walks. Sundar told Revathi about how his family moved from town to town during his school years because of his father’s transferable bank job. She would tell him about growing up on the books of Agatha Christie and James Hadley Chase, and about spending her summer school vacations in Pondicherry where she browsed her grandparents’ dusty, old bookshelves for hours. He would impress her with his encyclopaedic knowledge of Tamil film music, often singing a line, and asking her to guess the movie. She rarely guessed right, but enjoyed the game because he had a nice voice. 

One time, as they were approaching their apartment, the street quiet but for the sound of their slow, shuffling footsteps, Sundar stopped in his tracks, took his wife’s face in his hands and kissed her, right on the lips. Revathi blushed and looked away – surprised, thrilled, confused. Sundar grinned sheepishly; it was his first kiss, too. She then turned towards him, pulled him close to her and kissed him, right on the lips. 

It was a surreal experience for Revathi because she hadn’t married Sundar out of any expectation of love or romance. Her father’s business in Madras was haemorrhaging money, her salary as a teacher was negligible in the face of rising debts, and her younger sister still had to be put through college. Earning in dollars would help. So, when Sundar’s alliance came up, she didn’t bat an eyelid. He was, after all, just months away from a job in the promise land. 

Revathi looked down at her husband’s hand now and tried to smile. But she felt terrible; her chest hurt from slamming into the seat belt the previous night, and her mind ached with regret for not calling Mohan mama. 

“We’re making good time,” Sundar said. “If we can keep toilet breaks quick—” 

“It’s not as if I sit there reading a magazine,” Revathi snapped, letting go of his hand. 

“Sorry, I didn’t mean that… I don’t want to keep Mohan mama waiting, that’s all. What time did you tell him we’d be there by?” 

She stayed silent and looked ahead, focusing her attention on license plates until her eye caught a sign that said, “The Grand Canyon. It’ll take your breath away.” 

“We’re so close,” she said, pointing to the sign. 

“And yet so far,” Sundar replied, with a laugh, before quickly adding, “The Grand Canyon’s not going anywhere. We’ll be back.” 

Revathi nodded, and kept her eyes on the road but for occasional glances at her husband to make sure he was awake and alert. He was, his mood unaffected by hers, even humming tunes from Tamil movies as he overtook one car after another. At around noon, he pulled into a parking lot, and Revathi mechanically started pulling out muffins from her handbag. 

“No, let’s eat lunch there,” Sundar said, pointing to the diner he had parked in front of. 

“What?” 

“Come on, it’s on me,” he said, flashing a toothy smile. “It’s the least I can do for almost killing you.” 

“We can’t waste our money at a diner, Sundar.” 

“We can treat ourselves once in a while. It’s been a long trip.” 

Revathi started unwrapping a muffin. 

“What’s the problem?” Sundar asked. “You’ve been really moody this morning.” 

“Look who’s talking.” 

“Excuse me?” 

“You smile for the first time in a month, and then lecture me about being moody?” 

“This is a lecture?” 

Revathi held out the muffin to him. 

“Why can’t you just let me feel good right now?” Sundar asked, tapping her hand and the muffin away. “Mohan mama will help me find a job, you said. We’ll be in California soon. My life is looking up finally.” 

“*Our* life, you mean?” 

“Don’t do this.” 

She picked up the muffin that had rolled by her feet, flicked off the dirt, and bit into it. 

“I’m going into that diner whether you’re coming or not,” he said, opening the door. “Have your stupid muffin.” 

“Mohan mama doesn’t know we’re coming,” she said. 

“What?” 

She sunk her fingers into the muffin. 

“I didn’t call him.” 

“What do you mean?” 

“I was afraid.” 

“Afraid of what?” he asked, turning to face her. “Are you not afraid now? What will he say when he sees us?” 

“I couldn’t take another day in that depressing apartment with you sulking all the time, okay! And I didn’t have a choice. What if I had called him and he had said no?” 

“So we gave up our apartment and drove for two days so that this Mohan mama can turn us away?” 

“He may still let us stay.” 

“So we did this trip on a *may*?” 

“Listen,” Revathi said, dropping the muffin and grabbing Sundar’s hand. “He’s our only hope. The only thing we can do now is knock on his door and hope for the best.” 

Sundar put his forehead on the steering wheel and fumed, muttering incoherently. Then, he shut the door and started the car. 

“Sundar, let’s eat first,” Revathi said. 

He looked at her, and then turned away. “So, this is why you wanted us to take our own sweet time to get to San Jose.” 

He didn’t say anything for the next few hours, even choosing to pull over and check the maps himself instead of asking Revathi to navigate. As they entered California, Revathi noticed the landscape gradually change. No longer did she have to stare at license plates. Flat, dry plains gave way to green mountains and a sparkling blue ocean. She felt like she had entered a painting. Even the air smelled different, aided by a sunny drizzle. 

They pulled over at a gas station in a small, laidback town by the beach. As Sundar filled the tank, Revathi walked up to the pavement where a white woman in her 60s was walking her dog. They shared a smile. 

“You’ve got such long and beautiful hair, dear,” the woman said. “What’s your secret?” 

“Oh, I don’t know,” Revathi replied. “Coconut oil, I think.” 

“I should try it out then,” the woman replied, pointing to her neatly trimmed bob. “Well, you have a nice day.” 

“Excuse me,” Revathi said, even as she heard the it’s-time-to-go sound, the repeated clink of Sundar’s wedding ring against the hood of the car. 

“Yes, dear?” 

“How do you like California?” she asked. 

“How do I like California?” the woman repeated with a laugh. “Well, I’ve lived here all my life and I wouldn’t want to live anywhere else. Why do you ask?” 

“We’re moving from Texas.” 

“Oh, that’s wonderful. Is that your husband over there?” the woman asked, waving at Sundar. The clinking stopped as Sundar offered an awkward wave back. 

“Yes, that’s Sundar. And I’m Revathi.” 

“Could you say that again? I’m sorry, I don’t want to mangle your names.” 

Revathi repeated their names. 

“Well Revathi and Sundar, welcome home!” the woman said. 

For the rest of the journey, Revathi pre-empted Sundar’s stops to look at the map and told him what exits to take. They still didn’t speak a word to each other beyond the strictly necessary, but the mood in the car had lifted. Maybe it was the scent of a new breeze, but there was a temporary suspension of insecurities. The hum of Tamil film songs began to escape Sundar’s lips again. 

As darkness swiftly replaced the twilight sky, and rain replaced drizzle, their car rumbled up a sloping road set in between houses that looked identical with basketball hoops drilled above garage doors. The rattling bumper and the rain broke the silence of the neighbourhood whose residents had retired for the evening, protected from the winter chill by the warmth of their homes. The mountains were no longer visible, and for a bewildering moment, Revathi felt like they hadn’t left Texas at all. And then the moment passed as she saw the house number that she had burned into her memory. 

“We’re here,” she said. 

It was a beautiful white one-storey house, lit by porch lamps, with a manicured lawn in front. The invigorating scent of American suburbia – that of lawn-mower petrol – was thick in the air. As Revathi speed-walked through the rain and neared the front door – it seemed so much grander and sturdier than their apartment door in Austin – she heard the reassuring sound of a television; someone was home. She adjusted her sari and dusted muffin crumbs off herself. She pulled out of her handbag a wrapped gift – an ‘I love NYC’ mug – and raised a fist to knock on the door. Let’s get it over with quickly, she thought. Time to ‘rip off the Band-Aid’ as her Austin neighbour would say. 

“Wait,” Sundar called out to her. 

He walked briskly up the driveway, hand over his hair to keep away the rain, and joined his wife by the door. He looked at her, weighed down by her sweaters, a droplet of water on her nose lit by the glow of the porch lamp, and rehearsed in his mind what he was about to do. He then kissed her on the cheek. 

In response, she patted his hair down and adjusted his scarf with urgency, as if action, any action, would mask the truth. That she wished he hadn’t kissed her right then. That he hadn’t confirmed, at the doorstep of their greatest challenge, that the flicker of romance that had lit up those night-time walks had gone out. She no longer wanted to rip off the Band-Aid, she just wanted to break down and cry. 

But that was not an option. So, she took a deep breath and knocked. As she heard approaching footsteps, she stiffened. A bespectacled, tall, curly-haired teenager peered out of the door. 

“Yes?” 

Revathi stared back at him, her heart racing, unsure what to say. 

“Hi,” Sundar said, awkwardly filling the silence. 

The teen stared at them, puzzled. He turned around and yelled out, “Dad! Someone’s at the door.” 

An older white-haired man, also bespectacled and tall, joined his son. 

“Yes?” he asked, sharing his son’s puzzled look. 

“Hi uncle…” Sundar started. 

“Umm… I think you have the wrong house,” the man said, moving to shut the door. 

“Mama, I’m Ravi’s daughter,” Revathi said with desperation in Tamil. “Your cousin Ravi from Madras.” 

Recognition flashed across his face. 

“You’re Ravi’s daughter?” he asked in Tamil, switching easily between his American accented English and his mother tongue. He opened the door wide to get a better look at her. “You were *this* small when I saw you last… oh my, what brings you here… where are my manners,” he stuttered, opening the door wide. “Come in, please. You’re both soaking.” 

He dispatched his son to get towels. 

“Thanks mama,” Revathi said, as she stepped in, the smell of home-cooked food wafting in from the kitchen. She gave him the wrapped gift. 

“Oh stop, what is all this Revathi?” Mohan mama said. He took stock of the couple again. “I’m sorry, as you can tell I have a terrible memory. You are…” 

“I’m Sundar. Revathi’s husband.” 

“Revathi, you’re married?” Mohan mama asked with a generous smile, squeezing her shoulder. “Isn’t that the most wonderful news? I have so much to catch up on.” 

The couple entered a brightly lit living room, the floor warm and carpeted, family portraits and children’s art hanging up on the walls. Revathi noticed how the family looked happier in each subsequent portrait. Their smiles got bigger and the clothes more sophisticated. In the corner of the room, shelves were decked with academic and athletic trophies. And behind glass cases stood memorabilia from all over the world. 

“Asha and Deepa just stepped out, but they’ll be back soon” Mohan mama said. “Asha’s my wife and Deepa’s my daughter,” he added. “They’ll be so happy to see you two. We hardly ever get to see family, you know?” 

A beat. And then the inevitable question. 

“So tell me, what brings you two lovebirds here?” 

Revathi looked around the room, at an American dream realized, and wondered if this was the life she was supposed to build with Sundar. A big house of their own, accomplished kids, a tight-knit existence. But where would they start? Which of the crumbling pieces of their life would they even attempt to put together first? 

She had never felt so overwhelmed. So far from home. So insignificant. 

“Revathi, are you okay?” Mohan mama asked. 

She wasn’t. Covering her face in her hands, she began to sob softly. 

Sundar put his arm around his wife, and held her tight. “Mama, we need your help.” 