From: Saheli Khastagir <turna.ami@gmail.com>
Date: 14 January 2018 at 23:08
Subject: submission
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>

*Short Bio: *Saheli is an artist, occasional poet and a development consultant. You can find her work on her website <http://www.sahelikhastagir.com/>. She is currently developing an illustrated directory of mental health terms, called MH Illustrated <http://www.mhillustrated.org/>, and also creating 26 portraits <https://26portraits.wordpress.com/> of Writerly Women for 26 letters of the alphabet. 

-x- 

*Aam* (Mango) 

That summer we took a flight to Calcutta. 1998. I was one month short of 12. Flight was a luxury. But Baba’s company was paying for his and Ma’s flight (he had managed to combine our summer vacation with his work) and he decided to have us on the flight with them too. An extravagance! The vacation was already special. 

The moment I got off the yellow taxi taking us from the airport to Salt Lake, I was enveloped in the smell of Ponds’ powder, detergent and home-made ghee- my grandmother-, immediately followed by the sloppy kisses of my grandfather’s *Boroline* smelling oily face and neck. I couldn’t stop smiling. Bhai got those kisses too, but it was obvious I was the favourite. “Are they here?”, I asked excitedly. Yes, but they went to pay a visit to Tia’s Pishi; they’ll be back after lunch. The anticipation. 

Lunch was a feast of course. Every item set on the table had been carefully chosen to please us, the guest of honours. Didamma brought out each bowl from the kitchen like a present, with a big teasing smile, “*Bolo toh*, what’s in this?”, relishing our expression as we discovered. She was beaming, Dadushona was beaming, I was beaming- it was wonderful. 

Then as promised, as Didamma and Ma were clearing away the table, and Dadu switched on the TV to some Bangla news, I heard the sound of a taxi’s engine, the opening and slamming of its door, and the squeal of my aunt. “Kuheee! Didii!”, and she came running, hugging my mother, me, my brother; she almost hugged Baba too, then quickly stopped herself. And then, Tia. More beautiful than last time, wearing a soft yellow dress, her skin almost melting into the dress. Before I could get to her, bhai went and squeezed her with his bony figure, crushing that dress- he had no sense. But I couldn’t blame him, I wanted to crush her as well, shower her with kisses and hugs- we hugged long and urgently, I kissed her face, her neck, her arms, the back of her hands, and her face again, I didn’t want to stop. We were meeting after a year! 

We- she, my brother and I- went into the guest room, shared stories of our flight and train journeys, and then fell asleep on top of each other in the weight of the afternoon slumber. I woke up covered in their sweat, Tia’s soft arms around me. 

-x- 

“Mamon, get away from the sun. *Aro kalo hoe jabi toh! *(you will turn blacker!)”, my mother yelled at me from inside. I inched a few feet towards the shade. Tia continued sitting where she was, glowing in the sunlight. She is two years younger than me, and two years older than bhai. I was at an age where I considered my brother too young to play with or confide in. She, on the other hand, could easily shift gears from my level to his. We would spend hours sharing stories, drawing, making strange edible or non-edible concoctions with things we found outside or in the kitchen (flower petals, roots, vegetable peels, spoilt milk, etc.), and laugh laugh laugh. But she would suddenly lose interest and go play with bhai- running around the house, playing pretend games like a child, sword-fighting with him, exploring his cars. I couldn’t recognize her at those times. But I tried to not grudge my brother for the little time he had with her; I still got to sleep with her at night, while he slept with our uncle. 

During those times when she and bhai would be running around like fools, I would go and find my mother and aunt and sit with them, listening to them laugh laugh laugh just like us. There was so much joy in that house that summer. 

Mashi (my aunt) was talking on the phone to some relative of her husband, making a story to avoid going for dinner with them. My mother and I are trying not to burst out laughing; Mashi could barely control hers. At that point, I notice my mother wince and ask her about it. It was the humidity, she said, it was creating rashes on her skin, just under her bra. Would I like to see, she asked? Of course. Her sleeves are wide and large, she rolls it up above her shoulder, lifts her arm, and shows me the red rashes under her breasts. Put some cream on it, I tell her. “Later, after I take a bath.” Just clean it with some cloth, and put some cream. She laughs and says, not a big deal. I run to my little sling bag, find the wet tissues they gave on the flight and get some boroline and handkerchief from the dressing table drawer. She laughed out at my concern, and Mashi aww-ed. I carefully lifted back her sleeves the way she did it (I can do it myself, she protested lightly without stopping me), and then carefully first dabbed at her sweat with the handkerchief, then softly cleaned her skin under and around the bra with the wet tissue, and then with my fingers applied the cream in soft circles. I can’t describe the pleasure of being close to her like that, to feel her skin, to give her comfort, combined with the self-importance of being watched by my aunt. I can still remember the feeling of her skin under my fingers. I blushed and ran away to Tia and bhai. 

-x- 

I started wearing a bra in class 6th. At that time, I only wore it in school and special occasions. Now I wear it most of the time, even at home, even during that summer at our grandparents’. Tia is quite fascinated by it. When I started wearing it, I was the first person in my class to do so, and created quite a stir. Some of the boys asked to touch the back of my shirt to feel the strap under it. I let them. I have had three boyfriends since then; I think it may have played a part. 

Tia devours these stories and I can see is very impressed with me. I show her my straps, and tell her the different kinds I have owned over the last two years. I also complain, like I have heard my mother complain, about the sweat that accumulates around it, and then sighing in a faux martyr way exclaim those are the price you have to pay as you grow older. 

At night time, I let her feel me under it, and we compare our breasts. She doesn’t have any yet, and just wears a cotton slip under her dresses. But I caress her chest around her dark nipples, and I even drew circles with a sketch pen once, to mark where she will start having them. She sometimes worried that she may never have any, but she was wrong. 

-x- 

We were sitting on the balcony eating the mangoes that our grandparents’ landlord gave them from their garden. Didamma cut them into bite-sized pieces and gave three toothpicks for us to pick them up with. Some of the pieces were a little sour, and some a burst of sweet. She had mixed four mangoes together, so you couldn’t tell what each piece was going to be like until it went into your mouth. Every few minutes, bhai climbed up the railing and jumped back down. He found that entertaining for some reason, and Tia humoured him. 

Ma and Mashi came out telling us they were going out shopping. Before exiting the gate, my mother turns back to look at me, “I told you not to sit in the sun Kuhee”. “So what if I do!”, sudden rebellion. “You *know* what.” “So what if I turn more kalo (black)! Tia is sitting in the sun too.” “Kuhee”, my mother tried to reason, she kissed the top of Tia’s head, “she doesn’t have to worry. Don’t you want to look like your Mashi?” “No!” I said, glancing guiltily at my aunt, “No, I want to look like you. I hope I get more and more kalo until I look just like you”. She started to say something, but then Mashi started laughing at my little outburst, and Ma smiled and looked at her own mother, who was witnessing this exchange, with a strange expression (that I now think might have been pride), and went away. She didn’t ask me to get away from the sun again that summer. 

I was quite pleased with myself. 

-x- 

Ma was folding the sarees and asked me to help. My grandmother would starch them at home to make them look crisp and new like. I loved that smell. “Ma, do you want to have more children?” I asked her suddenly. She laughed, “why, do you want another younger brother sister? You can barely stand the one.”. “That’s not true”, I protested, “I don’t mind him”. 

Then after some time, I ask again. “No, not for me. But for yourself, do you want another.” 

“God no. If I manage to raise you two properly, I’ll be happy.” 

But I wanted to ask her something else. “So then…if you don’t want a child…do you…do you and Baba…do you both…you know? Or not?” 

She laughed hard at that. Ma always seemed to be laughing in those days, or at least that’s how I remember her. “Why do you ask that?” 

“Just like that. Tell me!” 

My mother and I had an unsaid agreement. We were really friends who were acting out this mother-and-daughter role until I grow up a little. But sometimes, we let the pretence fall, and acted like the true sisters that we were. So, this was me, beseeching her to let the pretence fall for a bit. 

She looked at me, hesitated, and said “Not really”, with a slight bitterness in her tone. 

“Do you want to?” 

She shrugged. 

But there was something else I wanted to tell her. I was bursting with the knowledge. But I didn’t know if that kind of sharing was allowed yet. 

I went for it. 

“You know…sometimes…you know down there where we pee…sometimes, I touch myself there. I mean…I don’t know if you know…there is a spot near the pee spot. It’s…if you touch it…it’s…it’s different. I like it…sometimes. Are you understanding? I mean…have you ever done that…what do you think of it?” 

She had stopped folding the saree. She was staring at me, with no expression. And then, she took a long breath and “Yes”, she nodded. Relief! She understood. Understanding, that’s what I wanted. 

“Have you ever…do you ever do that…?” 

“When I was in college, I…yeah, sometimes. Yeah.” 

I hesitated. I knew I was stretching it, our agreement, but I had to know. “Did Baba ever touch you there? I mean, does it feel better…nicer…if someone else…” 

“Mamon, please. You can’t ask me these questions”. 

A request to bring the act back on. The mother-daughter charade. But that’s okay. She understood! 

“Okay okay, one last thing…do you think it’s okay for me to touch there..?” 

She sighed. “There is an age for everything Kuhee. And this…this is not the age for you to think of all that yet. I mean there will be plenty of time to think of all that later. Look…if you don’t do things at the right time and pace, then you kill the surprise and joy of it, and it messes with the order and pattern of things. Do you understand? There are so many other things to occupy you now, which when you grow older, you will no longer be able to do. Don’t waste away these years. When the time is right, you will know.” 

And that was the end of discussion. Classic Ma. 

-x- 

Balcony and mangoes again. The mothers and grandmother is out. So Dadushona is indulging. He had Dussehri mangoes delivered by his friend travelling from Kanpur, and told us in the morning that we can have them like he used to in his childhood. But only after the women go out of the house. They won’t approve. They will insist on peeling, cutting, knives and forks. 

Instead we wait, and then in at the right moment, we bring out the treasures on the porch. Take one each, he instructs, take a small bite on top, and then squeeze the juicy flesh onto the mouth, the juice rolling down our chin, our hands. Our mouths bursting with the sweetness of the mango and of this freedom…to indulge, be a little uncouth. Bhai and Dadu were the sloppiest of all, they had mangoes on their clothes, the women will find out when they are back. 

Tia and I were doing much better. We can lick each other’s hands, I tell her. Why?, she asks. Because it will be more fun that way! She does not understand, but didn’t protest. And I took her soft slightly pudgy hand, and took each finger in my mouth and sucked on them, till her hands were clean and wet and cream coloured like the rest of her body. I felt something jolt in me when she did the same with my hands. She was so beautiful! Even then, with mangoes around her lips, licking my fingers, she was beautiful. Her lips were naturally red; she will never have to wear lipstick when she grows up, I would think. 

-x- 

That night, I decided to let her in on my secret.  When they were all sleeping, and we could hear the snores of my aunt and grandfather, I started caressing her hands, tickling her a little. She giggled. We were not ready to sleep yet. She was asking me about my friends in Mumbai, I was whispering stories, not all true, but at that moment, with the darkness around us, the parents asleep, and our bodies so close together on the floor, it all seemed true. We were sleeping under the same blanket. 

And then I whisper, “Listen, I will tell you a secret.” “What?”, she asks, immediately excited. “You can’t tell this to anyone else!” More excitement. “Promise me, promise me you won’t tell this to anyone else.” “I promise I promise. What is it?” 

“Listen, what if I tell you that there is a spot in our bodies…girls’ bodies, which very few people know about. It is…it is a magic spot. you know how wonderful it feels when I touch your spine, how the body shivers, the magic spot is like 10,000 times better than that.” “Oh.” she didn’t sound impressed. “Do you want to know where it is? I am telling you, it’s like no other part of the body!” “Where is it?” “Down there…” touching her lightly in between her legs. “Oh.” “Down there…*there* is the secret spot…it’s different from anything you know.” I could sense her excitement dissipating. “Really! If you rub it, it creates something like an electric shock in the body…but in a good way. I mean, once you get to know it, you would want to touch it all the time.” I was trying hard to retain her interest in my story. “What are you saying?” “When you rub it, it shoots nice feeling electric shocks in the body.” “No way!” “Do you want me to show you?” I can’t make out her expression, but she does not seem convinced. “C’mon, let me show you. You will know what I mean.” And she conceded. I was trembling. I could tell that she didn’t understand my enthusiasm, but she would, she would. 

I put my hand inside her pyjama, then I slipped it inside her cotton panties. “Didi, I don’t know…” she softly mumbled. Shhh, I reassured her, used my other hand to caress her arms the way she likes it. I felt her under the panties, so smooth, hardly any hair at all. It was like touching any other part of her body. My hands were shaking, I caressed her soft skin, and then softly went under, caressing still. I found the opening, I caressed the insides of the lips, then slowly put a finger inside the opening…trying to find the spot... “Didi…Didi don’t. This is weird”, not hesitant, or uncertain anymore. 

And immediately I pulled out my hand, and blushed hot with embarrassment. I mumbled something like “maybe you don’t have it yet, once you do you will know what I mean.” “Wash your hands!” she sounded disgusted. More embarrassment. I scrambled to the bathroom, shut the door behind me, switched on the bulb, opened the tap, washed my hands and splashed water on my face, I had to hold on to the sink to steady myself. What happened, *what happened*. This is not how I imagined it would be. I wanted to cry, to hide in the bathroom, I wanted her to forget all about it. Such humiliation. 

I went back to our mat, went under the blanket, turned on my side, my back to her and shut my eyes. “Are you angry, Didi?” I shook my head. I was crying. 

The next morning, we didn’t speak about it. I thought (hoped) she forgot about it. 

-x- 

Later in the week, when I wanted her to see the anklet my Pishi gave me, “Do you want to see something?”. She was drawing in her sketchbook, “Is it your magic spot?”, without even lifting her face. My face grew hot (she remembers!)…but she was teasing, and started giggling, so I giggled with her. I showed her the anklet, and we giggled at the fish bone designs on it. We giggled during dinner, we giggled at night, we giggled watching my brother pretend to be Salman Khan, we were giggling all the time that summer. 

There was so much laughter that summer. And mangoes. And something else too, but I never quite understood what it was. 