From: anmol sandhu <anmol_sandhu2007@yahoo.co.in>
Date: 31 January 2018 at 11:39
Subject: Re: Submission
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>

*“Remember Me”* 

*By Anmol Sandhu* 


I often wonder about forgetting. Not a momentary lapse in trying to recollect something, but actually being unable to remember. Like yesterday, when I was going to the market, I realized I had forgotten my car keys in the house. I rushed back to get them from their usual place, except that they were not there. When I couldn’t find them, I gave up and took a cab. 

Although such incidents are random and not quite often, I often fear if I have been passed down the ‘forgetting gene’ from my mother. 3 years ago, my mother had been diagnosed with Alzheimer’s. It all began one day, when she couldn’t unlock her phone. She had forgotten the security key and was sitting at the dining table, holding the phone in her hand, not knowing what to do. Up till then, such incidents were as random and as far apart as mine are at the moment, but after that the occurrence increased. In life we rarely have before and after moments, but that day was a definite moment in my mother’s life with Alzheimer’s. 

I remember walking out of the doctor’s clinic with her reports in one hand and several handouts detailing the disease in the other. The doctor had asked me to read about it as much as I could and prepare myself for what was coming my way. My mother was having a good day (I classify days as good and bad, depending on my mother’s memory on the particular day), but she refused to believe that she had Alzheimer’s. She was a criminal lawyer, had been one all her life and took immense pride in what she did, until Alzheimer’s took over her life. The doctor, a patient man with a knowing smile, explained to my mother about her condition but she walked out in a huff, leaving me behind to understand about a condition I could barely spell properly. 

Her memory is like a long ladder. She can hop onto any rung, any time and demand explanations. She’s been home for a better part of the last year, and that at times that has proven to be more challenging than having her out on her own. Like last week, she was in the year 2010. She woke up at 5, like she always used to when she was well; did yoga for an hour, showered and dressed and sat down at her table to work. In her mind, she was still working on a case that she had fought seven years ago and won. Her paper work, like all good lawyers, had always been immaculate. She walked to her cabinet, where all her files were labeled, numbered and tagged with the case names, and pulled out the particular case file. And that’s when all hell broke loose. The file had the proceedings of the whole case, right down to the day of the verdict and the clippings from newspapers, announcing her win. 

She yelled out my name, “Niyati!!” 

On most days, I was Niya for her. On days when she was furious, she used my full name. My day had begun. 

I rushed to her room. 

“Who did this?” she demanded. 

“Did what?” 

“This!” she had torn out a few sheets of paper along with the newspaper clippings and was waving them at me, “Who typed out all this? It details all my evidences, arguments and even press reports! And the press has already declared that I’ve won? What rubbish is this? Is this some silly prank that you and your brother are playing on me?” 

My brother died 5 years ago in a car crash. 

“He must have done the newspaper thing. I’ve typed out the arguments, you were narrating them to me last night and you wanted me to type them down in case you missed or forget something.” 

“I don’t forget anything!” she yelled. 

I quietly stood in the doorway and watched her tear sheets after sheets of paper. She pulled out a fresh notepad and ferociously started scribbling on it. By lunch things were so out of control, I had to give her three sedatives to put her to sleep. That wasn’t the first time it had happened and it wasn’t the last. 

Her memory lapses have in a way improved my memory. I try keeping everything in the same order, her clothes, files, notepads, stationery, the crockery in the kitchen, the furniture in the house. Anything away from the routine rattles her. I’ve hidden the photo albums, there are hardly any photos on display; they confuse her. Each time I give her medicines, I have to convince her that the pills are multi-vitamins and that she has been taking them for a long time. On one of her good days, I made her complete her paperwork for voluntary retirement, which she surprisingly did without any major hue and cry. On certain days, I think she understands her condition more than anyone else does. For the rest of the days, she’s in absolute denial. 

My father is in the army and visits us often but of late, his visits leave my mother more perplexed than happy. He suggested retiring early but I know he loves his job and I persuaded him not to. The last time he was here, my mother went on baking spree along with the cook for a bake sale that happened many moons ago. Dad and I spent the next day packing and distributing the muffins in the neighborhood. I know it pains him to see his wife like that, which is why I want him away from all the mess. At least someone should get to keep his sanity. 

I hardly have a social life. Several years ago, I had decided that I wanted to become a painter and had enrolled myself in an art school, much to my mother’s disappointment. She wanted me to go to Law school and become a lawyer like her, but I neither had the aptitude nor the inclination for it. Had I actually become one, I have no idea how I would take care of things the way I’m doing now. The only people I see regularly are the domestic help, the milkman, the newspaper vendor, the cook, the doctor and two young girls who are my assistants. I was a quite a social butterfly, visiting galleries and art exhibits, having my work on display several times a year. I had a studio where I worked along with a team of assistants and interns and I used to travel extensively. Parties that went on till wee hours and Sunday brunches were common and I was in love with my life. Now I have a studio on the first floor of my house, my assistants visit me every alternate day, bringing in my art supplies and carrying out my finished work. They’re the ones who arrange my exhibits now, I only go when I can; and the frequency is decreasing rapidly. 

My wide circle of friends has now shrunk to a few wise ones, who understand my predicament. They drop by sometimes, carrying my mother’s favorite cheesecake or a strong decaf for me. I almost scared quite a few of them when they surprised me on my birthday last year. They had come over with cake and lots of food, only to find me in my worst condition. I hadn’t showered or changed, the house was a mess and my mother was yelling at the cook for making fish instead of chicken. 

“Mr. Das doesn’t like chicken, don’t you know that! It’s his birthday today and you’ve ruined everything!” 

She addressed my father as Mr. Das and had confused our birthdays. Her bad day had made mine worse and between trying to pacify her and trying to not let her fire the cook, I lost both, my temper and my patience. 

“Can you for once let her do what she wants!? It’s my birthday today, not dad’s. I love chicken not fish and I asked her to cook what she’s cooking. Dad will be home in two months and you can cook a feast for him when he’s here. Only if you would remember anything by then!” 

I regretted the words the moment they came out of my mouth. 

“You’re such a disappointment Niya. Such a disappointment!” 

She threw away the ladle she was holding and stormed to her room, slamming the door behind her. The cook stood in the corner, silently weeping into the pallu of her saree. I gave her a glass of water and told her to take the day off. It was when after she had left, and I had gone to lock the door; that I realized that my friends had been standing outside and hearing the whole episode. They had left the cake box and the food outside the door along with a polite note wishing me and saying they’d drop by later. They never came back that day. And this marked the end of surprise visits from them. 

At times I wonder if it is a blessing. To forget so conveniently. How wonderful would it be to forget some people. Bullies in school, nasty bosses, nosy relatives, uncooperative colleagues, crappy ex-boyfriends. Even the lecher who bumped into you on the street. Or the many incidents that ruin my sleep and my special days. 

It’s not that we’ve only had bad days. Sometimes when mother is in better control of her mind and her condition, she sits with me and makes plans for the coming days. Like this morning, I woke up to the sound of someone working in the kitchen. It was too early for the cook to come so I rushed to the kitchen, and found mother brewing tea and making breakfast. I didn’t go to my studio till late noon, we just sat and talked about random things, she even cooked lunch. 

I secretly hope for more of these days. I wish I could turn back the clock and bring the wheels of time to a stop. Right where some genes in her body decided to take over our lives completely. Right where she lost her life to a disease and I lost my mother to her eccentricities. My friends often ask me if I dread each morning, not knowing what to expect. Honesty, I don’t. Over the years, I’ve developed coping mechanisms for everything. I know that her condition is not in her control and it’s progressively going to get worse, no matter what. But the only morning I dread is yet to come. 

The one when she can’t remember me. 

*Contact Information:* 

Postal Address: #1196, Sector 8-C, Chandigarh – 160009 

*Author Bio:* 

Anmol Sandhu is a Training Expert based out of Chandigarh. Her works have appeared in The Hindustan Times and The Tribune and micro-fiction platforms such as Terribly Tiny Tales and Paperless Postcards. She considers herself to be more of a story teller than a writer. When she’s not slogging at work or writing, she likes to read, travel and bake. 

On Tuesday 30 January 2018, 8:55:43 PM IST, The Editors < outofprintmagazine@gmail.com> wrote: 

Please check the guidelines - we don't open attachments. 

On 5 January 2018 at 14:26, anmol sandhu <anmol_sandhu2007@yahoo.co.in> wrote: 

Please find the attached submission for Fiction. This piece has also been submitted to other magazines, in case it is accepted elsewhere, I would notify you regarding the same. 

Thanks and regards Anmol Sandhu +91-8146642147 