From: Anirban Nanda <anirban.igp@gmail.com>
Date: 26 January 2018 at 13:08
Subject: Submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

*Too Much Sweetness* 

Anirban Nanda 

Whenever I think of my mother, I see her in an orange sari. It was her favourite. Its lower edge was embroidered with designs of peacocks in navy blue and white threads. The rest of the sari had small, white, repetitive patterns. To me though, she looked best in the crimson red sari with golden handwork all over it. It looked good on her fair skin. But somehow, that orange sari is stuck with my memory of her. 

Once, when I was little, of ten years of age; I went to my maternal uncle’s village with my parents. I’m sure about the age because I remember I had been studying in class five. 

It was a sunny day. The bright sky was faint blue where tender clouds floated lazily. We arrived on Baba’s motorbike. I sat in the front, on the fuel-tank, and I could see in the mirror the reflection of the white, dusty trail the bike was leaving. The village was full of white sand; where bamboo grew like grass, cactus thrived along with wild shrubs. 

Baba parked the bike in front of the cow who was masticating under the big tamarind tree in a leisurely fashion. She produced enough milk for the family to feed itself and sell the rest to the neighbours. She mooed an irritated moo. 

Uncle lifted me up the moment I was put down. Caressing my hair, pinching my cheeks (I hated it whenever someone touched my face), cooing strange gibberish in my ear, he carried me inside the two storied house – newly made, unpainted. Inside, the grey of the the walls had made the air heavy and cold. Aunty and mother were exchanging niceties (‘You didn’t need to bring the sweets!’; ‘He is growing up fast.’). Father asked for water while removing his shoes. 

Soon, aunty brought sherbet made from pola, a fruit, when dried and powdered, could be used in hot days to cool off the body. Cold, yes; but I didn’t like the smell. It smelled like an old sweater. Everyone was amused to see me grimacing after tasting the sherbet. Rai, the only child of my uncle and aunty, put down the glass from my hand and poked at my waist to make me laugh. Another thing I hated. 

Like every year we went there to celebrate Jamai-sosti, an occasion for the Jamai, the son-in-law, to be pampered for a few days. Only such occasions could bring the old relations together for us. My father was an employee in a factory. He moved to Haldia when he was seventeen and decided to settle there. 

Tea arrived next along with snacks. Later, I’d realise that, when there were guests it was the duty of the woman of the house to settle down in the kitchen and keep producing whatever the guests needed. During this time, the other members of the family also behaved like guests, ordering things. 

Aunty joined us (she already had put the rice on the clay furnace to boil) with her tea when we were almost finished with ours. I took a sip from Ma’s. It was awful. Ma and uncle both had diabetes. Their tea had no sugar. I grimaced again. They laughed. Then they started catching up with things. Father advised Rai to prepare well as she had the plus two examinations coming. He also advised her to go for the engineering and medical entrances, and if she couldn’t get into any of them, she should try law. 

Ma had three brothers, two of whom quarrelled out of the old home and built their own soon after the death of their father. My nanny died young of hepatitis a few years before my mother’s marriage. Everyone thought she had gastric problem until one day, she turned all yellow. It was believed that women make a big deal of ordinary things. Nanny thought so too and ignored the continuous pain in her stomach, which, at times, became spiky, as if a high voltage were being produced in her stomach which electrocuted her from within, rendering her senseless. 

The confectionery mother brought with her was called ‘steamed sweets’. Sweets that did not taste sweet. For diabetic patients. However, we who were not suffering from ‘sugar’ had our own sweets. The *real* sweets. 

Uncle had lost a lot of money that year in fishery. 10 lakhs. In the previous year, he had had a profit of 14 lakhs. It was like that, he commented with an assurance of someone experienced, all or nothing. You had to work very hard for proper nourishment of the fishes, mostly prawns. He stayed up nights maintaining oxygen and nutrients in the water by driving the big wheels in the rectangular pools. Sometimes, bacterium and other infectious insects attacked the prawns and made them sick. Then he had to apply insecticides and antibiotics in ample amount so that no more prawn got sick. That year, Japan refused the fishes exported from India because they were too full of chemicals. We had a good feast of prawn-coconut that year. In fact, the price of prawns came down so low that people stopped buying any other fish and only feasted on prawns. Later I’d learn that, scientifically, prawns are not fishes; they are actually insects. 

Baba concluded that fishery was a risky thing. It was a strange kind of gamble that involved hard work. He even advised uncle to open a grocery shop and settle down for good. For how long could he play this ‘six or out’ game? 

Aunty was worried about the cow who had not eaten anything since the previous day. She was due only three months for another calf. Mother suggested if aunty had contacted any vet. Not yet. Uncle said he’d go to Contai that evening itself to call the doctor. According to Ma, they should try to check the cow’s tongue for infection or feed her a mixture of boiled leaves and rice extract. 

In between these conversations, Ma sneaked two *real *sweets in her mouth. Others noticed but didn’t say anything. 

Rai had a smartphone. It was amazing. A TV in your pocket from where you could call! It had games! Such wonders! But neither did she play nor allowed me to play. She typed all the time, smilingly, lost in her own world. Later, I’d threaten Baba to buy me a smartphone if he wanted me to score eighty percent in the annual examination. 

* 

At the dinner, we all sat around the dining table while aunty served. She made the chicken so delicious that father munched the bones and sucked out the grey marrow, something he always had left for Ma to do at home. But Ma refused to have the curry that day and only took the meat. Rai was busy with her phone (she was weirdly serious) and I was curious to see my distorted reflection on the steel plate. My face was stretched and my eyes were fuzzy. Beside my reflection, there was the white hill of rice. Baba said he had not gone to his old home for a long time. The division of the property among the brothers was one of the reasons, he said. I remember once my father’s old home used to be the most amazing place. Bantu da, Diba da – the  sons of my paternal uncles – and I; we had so much fun running around the village, eating together, playing cricket, bathing in the big pond which was named after our family name. Then one day, separate homes were made and the food was no longer cooked on the same furnace. Baba talked how property killed the big families. Uncle agreed on it and he started narrating how the fight among him and his brothers broke out. Tears came to his eyes by the time he got to the scene where his elder brother had lifted a brick to smash his head. Mother started sobbing too stating the fact that now she couldn’t even go to their houses and meet them as she was so close to uncle. I was arranging chunks of meats of different sizes from the chicken leg-piece in ascending order. I found a piece in the curry that was dark grey and looked like the thing in my pant. Secretly I put the piece on my mother’s plate. 

Aunty insisted mother to have at least some curry, if not a bowlful; but she expressed her firm reluctance. She said as the curry had potatoes, it was not good for her diabetes. To that, aunty responded, somewhat accusingly, ‘Oh it is okay when you eat sweets! But all no no when it comes to potatoes. How pointless!’ That exchange, ignored by others, hurt both aunty and mother. Aunty made that chicken with a lot of effort and she was offended when her curry was refused to be tasted. Barely did she get any praise for the food she made. She was okay with that. But a straight denial! She had to say that. Although, that simple rebuke had triggered a time-bomb. 

But for now, Ma only looked at father and smiled guiltily at aunty. Then she scolded me because I was ‘eating like a snail’. 

* 

It was decided that we’d be sleeping in the guest room in first floor which was comprised of two rooms, a veranda giving a full view of the bamboo grove plus the lake nearby and a semi-circular balcony stretched out of the building. 

The bed was set. The mosquito net was hung from four ends. And Baba settled himself immediately at the far end, smiling for the simple joy in anticipation of having a sound sleep after a heavy dinner. Ma would sleep at the other end keeping me in the middle. It took only a few minutes before Baba started snoring softly. In her black sari, Ma, after giving a peck on my cheek, said, ‘Sleep.’ In those days, it became a habit of mine; that I could only sleep when my mother was beside me. At home, I’d wait in bed for her to arrive after washing the dishes. Only when she’d lie down by me and start spider-crawling in my hair with her thin fingers, I’d fall asleep. Her particular scent would give me a sense of security while I’d give myself to slumber. So I asked, ‘Won’t you sleep, Ma?’ She replied, ‘You sleep now, I’ll be back soon.’ Then, she turned off the lights and went out, leaving the dim blue of the already lit night-bulb in a room full of grey. 

As I was trying to sleep, I was wondering just when sleep would arrive. Now it’d come. Now yes, here, yes, now. But then I noticed Baba’s snores, which were faint; but the more I tried not to think, the louder I heard the snores. It increased steadily and soon I imagined a dragon in the blue dim, hissing its fiery breath on my face. It kept getting closer and closer, showing its sharp fangs and the stone-red eyes: cold, sneering, as if mocking the prey for its utter triviality before searing it to ashes. 

No, sleep didn’t come. It was quite some time while I futilely tossed and turned. Impatient, I got down from bed to find my mother. 

I didn’t have to go far.  Just outside the room, veiled by the semi-transparency of the saris hung from the clothesline fastened between the two ends of the veranda, I saw her. I saw her, my Ma; calm, poised, sitting cross-legged on a stool in the semi-circular balcony and smoking a cigarette. Half-closed, self-assured, her eyes were at somewhere very far. Yet, in the dark of that night, I could only see a branch of the tamarind tree nearby, illuminated by the faint incandescent lamp in the ground floor. Her hair, which had been tied in a bun, was unfastened, reaching the pale white of her waist in twirls. She smoked elegantly, gracefully, profoundly. She was so at ease in that stool that it seemed as if the wind, the molecules of the smoky air around her were submitting themselves at her feet, worshipping her, whispering secret chants. The tired ember that came alive with each drag densified the tender cloud of smoke that made her distant, unreachable. And at the centre of that cloud, there sat the goddess of ghostly dreams and uncomfortable sleeps. 

I stood there, transfixed, holding my breath behind the saris. In the scarcity of light, amid the greyness of the walls, she was still, she looked less solid. A volatile statue made of camphor. If she wanted, she could swiftly dissolve in the smoke and vanish forever.  A mosquito bit me on my arm and I slapped at it unmindfully. But she didn’t budge. She lit another cigarette. I had been taught throughout that cigarette is a bad thing. It kills. I used to see people smoking cigarettes or beedis in the roadside teashops and play cards. They had looked like the goons or ruffians in the Bollywood films. Like real villains. And I always thought: only bad people could enjoy a bad thing. 

I went back to my bed and nudged Baba to move a little. He grunted and turned the other side, creating enough space for me to lie down. I felt thirsty but I figured I could have the water in the morning. At the edge of the bed, facing the wall, I closed my eyes and counted Baba’s rhythmic snores. 

* 

Next morning, we were preparing to return because I had school on the following day. Aunty was busy packing two nylon bags containing tamarind, coconuts, a packet full of prawns (Uncle went early in the morning to his fishery), a jar of mango pickle, pola and guavas. Mother was dressing up in the first floor whereas Baba dusted his bike. When everyone was ready, I touched the feet of uncle and aunty (Baba commanded me to do so) and when I tried to touch Rai’s, she lifted me up and pinched my cheek with a sad smile. Then she put me down and sat alone staring blankly at the floor. Her phone was nowhere near her. She looked beautiful when she was in deep thought and I wanted to kiss her cheek. But as soon as the bags were hung from the hook at the rear end of the bike, Baba sat me down in the front. Like I was a doll. At last, when my mother appeared in the orange sari, Baba started his bike. Uncle invited mother to visit again in Puja, but she suggested they visit us during Viswakarma Puja as Haldia was famous for it. They smiled a familiar, mutual smile which could only be shared between two close siblings. 

Then, she came to father and said, ‘Listen, you take Bubai home. I’ll go by bus.’ 

He turned off the engine and asked, ‘What?’ 

‘I said I’ll take the bus.’ 

Removing his helmet, he asked, ‘Why?’ He did that with such a serious tone that uncle and aunty came near us, worried. 

Learning the matter, they got confused and uncle said, ‘Why won’t you go on the bike? Do you feel nauseous on it?’ 

She shook and her head and said, ‘No’. 

‘I don’t understand this. What is the issue?’ Baba put the helmet down on the oil-tank quite forcefully. I held the tank tightly. 

Aunty came closer and asked meekly, ‘Are you miffed about something?’ 

‘Not at all, Mita’, she shook her head again. 

‘Something happened? Are you unwell?’ Baba attempted to get down from the bike. 

‘No, I am not ill. What is the big deal? I am sick of being treated like a helpless child,’ she replied firmly. That silenced everyone. 

Baba looked hurt and he started the bike again. Mother gave a peck on my cheek and whispered in my ear, ‘Don’t worry. I’ll reach home faster than you. Let’s race, huh? Let’s...’ I didn’t listen anymore. I was searching for the stench of cigarette in her breath. 

As the bike rolled forward, I stared at the mirror, at the reflection of my mother striding forward in her favourite orange sari; her eyes on the road, her jaws set, her watch gleaming in the intense sun. I looked away and concentrated on the road. But it was hard to keep my eyes open in the wind. So I closed them. 

END 

Short Bio: 

*Anirban Nanda*, 23, is a post-graduate student of Electrical Engineering. His stories have previously appeared in ‘The Bombay Literary Magazine’ and a few anthologies like ‘Defiant Dreams’. One of his stories had been long-listed in the DNA-Out of Print short fiction contest 2016. He prefers tea to coffee and he loves to travel by train. He blogs at www.anirbanigp.wordpress.com. 