From: Salil Chaturvedi <sal_chat@yahoo.com>
Date: 22 February 2018 at 11:19
Subject: SUBMISSION
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>

Bio: Salil Chaturvedi writes short fiction and poetry. His collection of poetry, In The Sanctuary Of A Poem, was published in October 2017 on Amazon's Kindle Platform. He was the Asia region winner of the Commonwealth Short Story Competition 2008, and the winner of the Uisun/British Council Short Story Competition 2007. His stories have appeared in Indian Quarterly, Himal, Indian Literature, Out of Print, Anti Serious, and various print anthologies. His haiku and haibun have appeared in Modern Haiku, Frogpond, The Heron's Nest, Acorn, Chrysanthemum, Cattails, and many other international haiku journals. He currently resides in Goa. 

*Caw!* 

*By Salil Chaturvedi* 

They have a special name for me, and even though I don’t know their tongue I know my name when I hear it. And just like a dog that will know its name but will not be able to reproduce it for you, I can’t call out my name. Only they can. *Caw*! There’s such an edge in the way they call out my name. It pierces the ears and hurts way back down behind the knees. *Stand further to the right. Further …  more … Yes, that’s better… much better…* The interesting thing about names is that they aren’t spoken in any language. They’re a language all by themselves. When you address someone: ‘Caitan,’ or ‘Lisa,’ or ‘Vivek,’ or ‘Fatima,’ you aren’t really using a language; you are using a sound. Listen, try this sometime—call out ‘Oy!’ on a Margao street loudly and look at how many people turn around in response. Isn’t it strange that so many more people respond to a sound that is free? Perhaps we are all waiting for someone to call out to us. And even though we fall in love with our names and with the shapely letters that represent them and the sweet sounding syllables that tell us who we are, we forget an important fact: that in our essences we are nameless as the stones on my neighbour Alfie’s boundary wall. *Is this okay? Yes, perfect … just keep it going … swing harder and keep it high…* *Caw*! It has spread—­my name—through word of mouth. One has told another, then another, and they’ve kept the chain going, telling, retelling the story to their neighbours, pointing me out as I pass by, talking about me to their children and their friends or whoever else cares to listen. They’ve studied my movements, observed my manners, my expressions, my habits, and compressed all that detail into a single sound. It’s impressive, but I want to tell them: ‘It wasn’t really my idea! It was an accident. I am traumatised by the whole thing, too,’ but, like I said, I don’t know their lingo. Besides, the time for explanations is long gone. Listen, if you swing a long hose, you might hit somebody. But if you swing a hose with the intention of hitting someone, even though you might miss, you’ve already struck at something, haven’t you? And who knows, you might not miss at all. What then? I must tell you, I once saw a man (Ernesto, who runs a car-wash service) throw a stone at a dog in our village. The dog was running with its tail between its legs and he was too fast for Ernesto. But, then a strange thing happened. Ernesto hurled the stone, but in his haste he released it a bit early and the stone went off on a slight tangent. Suddenly, for no reason, I saw the dog change its course and run straight into the path of the stone as if pulled against its will by all the hate and the anger of the stone. I guess that’s what happened with the hose because I can’t explain it any other way.  Violence has an attraction all its own. And unlike love it thrives on an audience; it likes it when there’s someone to cheer. *Caw*! *Be careful…they’re quite smart, these buggers…they can read your thoughts…* Oh, go to hell (What to do, sometimes I get defiant). It was all such a big mistake, anyway, and if you can’t understand that, there’s nothing I can do. Still, I wish I could make peace. But how can one make peace with stories? And they keep my story going. The thing is, you don’t die when you are dead; you die when you are forgotten. And even though I’ve killed them, I’ve not forgotten them, so they live on. *Caw*! See? And they are determined not to forget me. How do I tell them that for a child of ten every thing is an accident? Every day is an accident. Every joy, every sorrow, every friend…everything. It’s just accidents. *Got him! Well done, but don’t stop! There’ll be others! You’re a pro. Isn’t he a pro? Keep swinging the hose, José…* The motion begins at the shoulder. You raise your arm above your head and start rotating your shoulder. The hose scrapes the ground a couple of times and then lifts itself off as it picks speed. You swing from your shoulder a little harder, making wider circles and the hose rises till it is finally parallel to the ground. Now the swinging motion is taken over by your elbow, which is perpendicular to the ground. It churns, round and round. The hose moves faster and faster, and begins to swish. By now the elbow is almost stationary—it has transferred the momentum to the wrist, which is spinning like a top at the end of your arm. When the hose begins to hum you can keep it going just by the push of your thumb. Events are like that. When they are primed and set in motion, it doesn’t take much to keep them going. The other thing about events is that they don’t really happen. There is no single, neatly compartmentalised event. We are constantly creating packets of time in our heads and calling them events. Sort of like trapping space into a moulded piece of glass and calling it a bottle. And like every bottle, every event has a hole from which it leaks out to all other events. The hose is moving so fast now that it is at every point in the circle at the same time. *Caw*! *Another one! Wow! He’s got another one! You really are a pro. I’ve never seen anything like this; he’s got another one!* I wish I could somehow learn their lingo. Just so I can tell them to stop. Who started it? Wasn’t it them? OK, we started it. We had to get the goddamn roof repaired. Fix the termite-eaten rafters before the rains came. Can’t they understand that? We also congregate, like they do. Our clan comes together in a time of crisis. Look: that’s grandfather sitting in the centre, and that guy kneeling beside him, he’s the contractor. That’s my father, the eldest son, who’s bending down to examine the civil engineer’s drawing, and along him are the two younger brothers, my uncles. They are no threat to you. Is that so hard to understand? This is about our nest. We were just repairing our nest. It had been a beautiful day. I had taken Alice, a cousin of mine, out to the railway tracks. First, I had shown her the tiny purple flowers that covered a rock and drawn her attention to the tiny bees that were entering the flowers, then I had made her sit on the tracks and asked her to close her eyes so she could concentrate on the vibrations before the train came thundering down. It had been a close call. We had jumped when we heard the horn of the train. I hadn’t realised it was so close. I guess I was distracted by her presence. But I hadn’t panicked. That was the important thing. Alice had frozen, mesmerised by the engine hurtling towards us. I had calmly held her shirt and pulled her away from the railway track. We were so close that when the train went by we felt the suck of the air. Her hair was in my face. She had put her arm around me and I was king of the world. She’d been wearing a white shirt with green leaf patterns. Then, when we got back home, I was recruited to swing the hose to keep them away. It was the bright idea of Alwyn, my youngest Uncle. The rest, as they say, is history. *Caw*! *You killed four of them! I’ve never seen anything like this. You’ve created family history, José!* Listen, I once saw a crow sitting on a barge filled with iron ore. The barge was a pretty sight with coconut trees swaying on the shore, almost as if they were waving at the barge. I was on a jetty, fishing all by myself. *Caw*! I heard my name, so I looked up towards the barge. I found the crow sitting over the pilot’s cabin from where he had the best view. The wind turned some of his chest feathers now and then. As the barge crossed me the crow turned his head towards me. I looked into his eyes, letting him know I wasn’t scared. Then I watched the barge for a long time to see when he’d leave the barge, but he didn’t. I watched the barge get smaller and smaller, and I kept hearing him. *Caw!* *Caw!* Suddenly, I realised that he was not calling my name anymore. It came as a shock to find that I could understand what he was saying. Perhaps he had chosen a dialect I could understand or perhaps I had heard their language long enough to comprehend it. I was spellbound by what he was saying. ‘There’s too much hunger in the world,’ he was shouting across the waters, ‘because you eat too damn much.’ As he continued his diatribe, I gathered that they had got his bit of earth that day and he was determined to follow it to the end of the world. Finally, as I turned to go, I heard him call out one last time, his voice riding the afternoon breeze. I often wonder where the crow landed up. I shudder to think of the curses he spat out as he went out to sea on that barge. The thing is, our family never lived under that roof again and my elbow hurts every monsoon. 

