From: Ahmed AL Shamandy <ahmedshamandy959@hotmail.com>
Date: 25 December 2017 at 16:45
Subject: submission
To: "outofprintmagazine@gmail.com" <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>


*Practicing Absence * [short story by: Ahmed AL Shamandy] 

I think I died today. I wasn’t ready at all. Death is less of a pleasant thing that could happen to you when you are not ready, even for the suicidal. It’s not like having guests show up uninvited at your door while you were planning to spend the evening not watching porn or stalking your crushes on social media, instead of doing researches on curing some of humanity terminal illnesses like cancer, and the lack of intelligence on some occasions. 

“Excuse me, but this is not a proper time to be here, I have a lot of work to do.” You can’t say that to that kind of guests, unfortunately. 

The day started normally like any other day in the past 34 years or at least the ones I could remember. I woke up from an incomplete dream that my brain let go of most of its details. My room looked the same, I looked the same, felt the same and wanted the same things. I didn’t know what exactly I wanted but it’s pretty much the same of what I wanted yesterday and the day before. With the normal morning noises outside, an extra noise was occurring in the street down my window on the third floor. 

I opened the window, looked up and saw the beautiful blue sky, then looked down and saw Mr. Naguib was having a heated argument with Dr. Sherif. There was a small crowd from the building inhabitants and neighbors from the block standing there forming a half circle around the two men. It was like a contemporary Colosseum encounter in the eyes of a contemporary art fan with no emperor, lions, swords or art.  Mr. Naguib was pointing at me and everyone looked where his finger guided their eyes. I didn’t notice I was topless with a sleepy face and a post-modern-waking-up hairstyle. I felt embarrassed, I could have worn a shirt or something. There were some girls in the crowd following Mr. Naguib gaze, and now surely all the imaginary chances of me having dinner with any of them have climbed to the next imaginary level. 

Mr. Naguib was so tense while talking, his veins were popping around his shirt collar. The man had a nice tie. Besides his work as a banker, Mr. Naguib was a full-time rules guard. He pointed again towards my window and I realized that he wasn’t actually pointing at me, but above my window as I saw some workers were preparing initial touches to install a new air conditioner outside Dr. Sherif’s apartment. Then it came to me that I woke up to a sound of a driller noise instead of my alarm. 

I went back in, while I could still hear the argument down there, apparently, Mr. Naguib thought that putting the air conditioner compressor at that side of the building was violating the rules of the universe and beauty of nature. The rule was that all air conditioners had to be placed on the inner side of the building frontage aligned with all the other well-behaving air conditioners. By violating that rule Dr. Sherif behavior was a threat to science and art. 

I put on my shirt while brushing my teeth, I had an interview at a new place, Called in sick at my current work. Actually, I was slightly sick, so it wasn’t a complete lie. I sneezed, just missing my jacket while putting it on, took a final look at the mirror and went out. 

The elevator finally arrived. I opened the door, and instantly became intoxicated by a smell of a feminine perfume, yet the cabin was empty. It’s probably Mrs. Riad from the 8th floor we sometimes run into each other in the elevator on occasion. I’ve always thought about the health benefits of taking the stairs - it’s just couple of floors and I am still young but I always preferred the elevator at least in the morning because you can take more final looks in its mirror or maybe run into some interesting people with nice perfume, and exchange mutually healthy smiles. 

At the entrance of the building I saw the crowd still there, and apparently, Dr. Sherif got the workers down with him and his air conditioner plans came to a halt. Mr. Naguib was still talking more confidently now as he got most of the Colosseum crowd on his side. 

It was 8:05 AM as I had almost one and a half hour to reach my destination. The road will probably take one hour based on the very organized system of traffic in our holy city, so I didn’t have to take a cab all the way to there. It’d be too expensive for the amount of money I have left in my budget for the rest of the month, but the bus was a bit risky because of the crowd you need to share all the space with. I made up my mind and decided to take the bus to the area near my destination and maybe I will take a cab from there to cover the rest of the distance. 

The bus stopped, the only place available was at the edge of the middle seat. The time was ticking so I had to jump in and have the wind to my face and chest all the way to the destination for almost 40 minutes. The buses in our area keep the main sliding door opened for more flexibility and speed for people to jump in or out, and of course with all the benefits of having fresh air circulating inside even in freezing winter days, “it’s good for your lungs” an old driver once said. I would probably pay more for meds later than the money I saved from not taking a cab straight away. 

The driver was smoking politely as his hand holding the cigarette outside his window. He tried his best to puff the smoke away so the rest of the people inside can deal with only a maximum of 19% of the smoke and that is probably an acceptable amount, even for the pregnant lady at the back seat. 

Everyone was sitting calmly minding their own business, apart from two ladies at the back, they were discussing the business of their cheap neighbor who decided not to pay extra 2,844 L.E for her daughter’s wedding makeup artist and how that daughter protested by threatening to jump off their building. Maybe makeup plans then would cost more. 

I was watching the street and tried to think about my interview. How will I introduce myself in less than two minutes, and how not to freak out if I was asked about those sweet little white lies in my resume. The street was calm and traffic was fine. Daily life continued outside our vehicle and I always enjoyed watching it from that moving point of view. Some of the polite smoke came my way. I turned my face back inside the bus. I had already altered the two ladies cheapskate discussion with my headphones. They never seemed to stop talking at any point during that day. The other minding-their-own-business passengers seemed to silently mind other people business too on their smartphones, except for the pregnant lady who was sharing the view of the street with me. The driver was minding the street business very well, he seemed like the pilot of a spaceship flying us to the next galaxy where we can find alternative sources of energy, job opportunities, and affordable makeup plans. 

I noticed the driver is checking out some girls passing by as we reached a traffic light. He kept looking at them, studying their entities, carefully, with a solid impression on his face. I looked back to the other side of the street. Traffic was regretting being nice all that time and now it’s getting back in form. Our moving point of view had temporarily stopped on a single frame. 

On the sidewalk, there was a half-empty local café house. People sitting still drinking their morning tea or coffee and exchanging thoughtful judgmental looks with anyone or anything within their sight. 

I had eye contact with a man in the café. What are you doing there old man? What failing dreams from your past life that got you here looking at me at this moment instead of looking at a beautiful girl on a yacht cruising in the Caribbean. The eye contact got broken by a girl in a floral blouse. Our eyes, mine and the man’s shaped the base of a triangle while the beautiful walking girl was the triangle head. I thought what a dream of being with that girl on that yacht in the Caribbean without having that man there of course! She walked making life brighter for everyone. If I wasn’t going to that interview, I’d be still watching her walking away regretting not speaking to her at all. It’s only dreaming of me and her having our first dinner, first walk, and first goodbye till the last argument of a relationship that doesn’t end with cuddling and watching the sunset. She’s just leaving like the smoke of our driver cigarette, with 0% of her existence left in my world, but maybe a 19% of her image temporarily implanted in my head. 

I came back to reality as the traffic light turned green. The driver pressed the gas while his head came back rotating ninety degrees away from the sidewalk on his left where the girls of his daydreams were walking. A loud noise of breaks broke the brightness of the morning and everything in my perspective turned to slow-motion. My body flew outside the bus as I became like an astronaut unwillingly leaving our spaceship. I could see a surprised look on the café man’s face and a ghostly smile, as my body finally hit the ground and everything came back to normal speed. 

It’s rare to have just the sky filling your entire field of vision in the middle of a busy city street. A joyful moment to see the clouds with the gradient blues. That beautiful scene was interrupted by faces popping up from everywhere and slowly some hands were coming closer to me. I felt some pain on my back after I stood up but I was very mad when I realized that my suit was touching the ground all that time. Looking at the beautiful sky in the middle of a city street while you’re lying on your back comes at a price. 

Now I could see our bus front had more than just a touch with another bus in the crossroads and I can hear and see the two drivers discussing what happened like gentlemen. They were close to each other exchanging creative adjectives for each other ancestors. I checked my watch and it was 8:27, an alternative transportation had to be found immediately to take me to the interview where my plans for a better future will begin. I would make tons of money, buy the entire city, and come here every day to lay on the ground and watch the sky. 

I had to cross the street leaving the scene flaming still between the drivers. I reached into my pocket for my phone and it was not there.  I checked the rest of my pockets and nothing but I found an old gum stick. I moved back to where I was lying on the ground and started looking for my beloved phone. Insults were still being thrown around and the crowd kept getting bigger and bigger. The street traffic was in paralysis. I couldn’t find any familiar faces that I saw earlier to ask about the phone. I was in despair and my world was collapsing with the rhythm of the chewed strawberry gum in my mouth. A pair of old shoes stopped near me, I looked up and it was my triangle companion. 

The old man from the café was there holding my phone and handing it to me. We were in a frame like “The Creation of Adam” painting. Now I would gladly give up the imaginary yacht in the Caribbean for this man, but only the yacht, not the girl, he didn’t save my life anyway. I thanked the man very sincerely and turned around to find both of us in the middle of the scene. It has been gradually moving towards us by the forces of the universe and it became violent as some of the other people who got stuck in the street because of the fight joined in initially to solve the situation, but later they became a part of it. The snowball kept getting bigger till insults were developed into punches. A man thought his mom’s beliefs were in question when a random insult flew from a random mouth inside the snowball and landed in his ear, even though he wasn’t the intended person with the description. The man threw a punch which was intended to land somewhere on the face of his insulter, but somehow it drifted and landed on another face. Exponentially punches and kicks started growing. Seconds passed and a random punch landed on the face of my old man. It’d have been the fifth shot on a top ten list of best random old people knockouts of the year. It was sad. The man dropped to the ground instantly. Standing helplessly in shock, I just held the man and walked few steps to the café as the waiter there helped me to sit him on a chair and try to wake him up while investigating the damage on his face. It was a red mark on his right side. The man finally opened his eyes after moments of worries for us waiting for him to come back to this beautiful world and live more of it. He didn’t need to leave with just one punch and get bullied in the waiting line of the judgment day by some insecure pretentious dead who brag about their more fancy tragic endings. 

It was 8:58 and I thought I should call to cancel the interview and while I was into my thoughts I saw the man crying, the tears were on his cheeks falling slowly. I couldn’t bear it. I handed him a glass of water and left him with the waiter as I rushed to the snowball of conflict which continued growing so much bigger and getting noisier. 

I spotted the one who mistakenly punched the old man still battling inside. I jumped in and stood in front of the man, punches and kicks were all around me. I looked him in the eyes and took a swing.  The punch took longer than I expected to land on the man’s face. He didn’t seem like an evil person at all, His face was normal and he was in formal clothes, probably he was late on something important and his nerves couldn’t stand the pressure. He probably has been doing great on anger management. How many times he kept smiling or pretending that everything is ok when his boss mistreated him or lost some money, or his wife showed less support and enthusiasm at his life achievements than being excited about shopping. It was just the day he couldn’t hold on anymore and probably 19% of that rage landed as a punch on an old man’s face by mistake in a traffic fight. 

My punch landed on the man’s face and I thought that’d be enough and now I will leave, my job was done there. Essentially it wasn’t that kind of an activity to just quit and carry on with life. A fight doesn’t end by leaving while your opposition is still conscious and angry. The pain spread from the edge of my fist to my arm all the way to my entire body. I don’t remember the last time I punched someone in real life. It’s not very entertaining as it is when you do it in a video game. I wasn’t planning on getting punched or kicked when I woke up this morning the odds of that would be less than running into the girl with the floral blouse again, but at that moment the odds were high for receiving punches and still low for meeting the girl again. The man absorbed the punch and looked back to me and took a swing. I managed to dodge his punch, but his other hand came faster than my reflex skills. My face got rocked by his fist. We continued fighting in a way that would make our ancestors in the evolution tree very proud. 

I got tired and I didn’t have any time to catch my breath and my competitor apparently felt the same. Right before we decide to come terms with ending this, the man got a knockout from a random hand away from mine. I saw him falling to the ground, and saw two police officers coming from across the street. I thought about getting the knocked down man out of the fight but with my bruises and pain, it took me longer to initiate that thought practically. When I finally decided to do it I got a hard punch and I saw the street ground rushing so fast to my face. 

There was no sky. I was standing in a line of people, with other lines were seen to my right and left. No recognizable faces I could identify, what are we waiting for? I saw the passengers of my bus in a line far away, on another line I saw Mr. Naguib is still arguing about the air conditioner and the line next to him was Dr. Sherif and the workers.  I glimpsed the old man from the cafe in another line. I walked to him and asked if he is feeling ok, there were no bruises or marks on his face. He wasn’t crying. He smiled and told me that I shouldn’t have joined the snowball, and he wasn’t crying he just suffers from an allergy that makes his eyes tearful sometime. 

Far away from the infinite lines, I saw the fight still going, it was still crowded. The two police officers approached the crowd. I saw myself still fighting in there, sending and receiving punches and kicks. As the officers reached the scene, the fight snowball dissolved. It was only me, the two drivers and the guy I had been fighting. 

The officers didn’t speak, they just looked at the four of us, and suddenly the other three men pointed at me. The officers looked at me and reached their pockets, pulled out their guns and pointed it at my face. I could see the old man at the café looking at me with a visible smile on his face. I heard the sound of a gunshot, I wasn’t sure if the sound came once or twice. 

The sky came back again and it was blue still, I was sitting on a chair on the café, my face was a bit wet and my back hurt a little bit.  The street looked fine, traffic was ok. I was alone, with a cup of hot tea with mint on the table. I checked my watch it was 9:30, my phone was there with a dead battery. I just spent the next couple of hours enjoying tea and coffee and while watching the street. 

On my way back home I stopped to buy some groceries. At the checkout I saw a girl walking in, she was in a blue floral blouse but it wasn’t the other girl I saw earlier with the similar outfit. Blue floral blouses are beautiful but it doesn’t make people the same. I walked to our building and saw Mrs. Riad heading the entrance, so I rushed my walk. Few steps before the entrance I heard an instant crash behind me. I looked back and saw Dr. Sherif’s air conditioner down on the ground two steps behind my back. I give credit to Dr. Sherif’s workers for keeping that piece steady and fixed enough time, and for Mr. Naguib who considered giving them the time to do their job incompletely enough. 

I did catch Mrs. Riad at the elevator, I stepped in and the perfume was as beautiful as always. I pressed the third and eighth floor buttons for both of us. She thanked me as we exchanged smiles. She looked beautiful and so did the world. 

The End. 