From: Joyeeta Nag Chowdhury <joyeenagc@gmail.com>
Date: 26 February 2018 at 19:26
Subject: submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com
*Heat of the Moment* 

*by* 

*Joyeeta NC.* 

“Wait! That hat won’t protect you from the sun! It’s more suitable for the summers in your country. But it looks good on you!” The young girl smiled her friendly smile at me. My pale skin had already started to burn from the blazing rays of the unrelenting Indian sun but I was not one to give up easily. I ignored her, continuing on my day’s adventure with a big flask of ice-cold water slung from my shoulder, sunscreen lotion and mosquito-repellent slathered on every inch of exposed skin, a dozen small bottles of the best brand of mineral water and my prized DSLR camera. Hat and dark shades perfectly in place, I was annoyed by her over-friendly demeanor. Turning around, I tried to fix her with an unfriendly gaze but her smile did not falter. 

“Look at your face! It’s as red as my bangles.” Giggling, she held up her slender wrists adorned with inexpensive glass bangles, four in each hand. Their ruby red shimmered and dazzled in the sunlight. “Here.” She extended her hand with an earthen cup clutched in her fingers which was full of some watery liquid. “Have some lemonade. Home-made. Very good for the heat.” I noticed that her blouse hung loose on her ill-nourished body and her teeth were rather large when she smiled. Her dark brown skin seemed to have a lustre to it though, maybe the unpolluted country air helped. Her long skirt, which was worn and patched in some places billowed in the warm breeze and she wrapped it tightly around her as she kept smiling that happy, friendly smile and stared at me with hopeful eyes, willing me to take the cup from her. In this remote village in Southern India, I was surprised this girl could even converse in English. 

“No, thank you. I have my own,” I replied unsmiling but she continued to hold it out to me. I thought she hadn’t understood. 

“I said I don’t need that!” I said, pointing to the tiny earthen tumbler, a little too loudly and perhaps a little more curtly than I had intended. She seemed to understand and nodded nervously, her eyes sad, and it seemed for a moment that a cloud had obscured her countenance. But next moment, she was smiling at me again as she took a few steps forward which brought her closer. Instinctively, I drew back and slipped my hand inside my pocket to make sure my wallet was safe. What did this girl want? 

When I had left my home in Kent, south of London, to come on this expedition with a group of photographers like me who worked for prestigious newspapers and internationally acclaimed television channels, I had been repeatedly warned by my wife and friends. 

“India!” My wife exclaimed woefully. “Haven’t you been following the news? Come on, Brett! You work alongside journalists every day! How can you not know!” 

I really did know and I couldn’t blame her. I knew about the problems…… the safety issues that had risen almost to the point of threat, especially for Europeans like us, who were often thought of as extremely rich, with thick wads of pound and dollar bills stacked in their wallets, though that was rarely the case. My journalist friend Tim and his female companion were brutally assaulted on his work-cum-holiday expedition in the mangrove forests and marshy lands along the India-Bangladesh border. They were there to film some exotic wild life seen in that region, especially the majestic Bengal tiger and were staying at a forest bungalow. Their attackers targeted his girlfriend and Tim was lucky to have been carrying a firearm which ultimately saved their lives. Tim had recounted this tale of horror many times in gatherings and parties and I had heard many more about duping, frauds and also using children as decoys before the actual gang looted unwitting tourists. Law and order was negligible here. All those horror stories flooded my mind as I tried to calm myself down mentally. What were the odds of this teenager robbing me? Not much, I assured myself. 

I was standing at the foot of a small hill in a deserted stretch of land and there were not many people around. She, on her own was no match for a six foot two burly man like me but what if her gang was hiding in the bushes, waiting to pounce at the first sign from her? What if the lemonade that she was trying so hard to get me to drink was drugged! I thought fast. Maybe offering her some money would help me get rid of her…..? 

“Here, take this…” I held out two hundred-rupee notes to her, a couple of pounds back home but a fortune here. “You can keep this for… err…. for offering me the drink.” I tried to smile. 

Instantly, she started shaking her head and her smile vanished too. “Not selling. Just… just wanted to….,” she seemed to be struggling to find the correct word, “help! Yes, help.” She smiled again, and her eyes lit up. “Amma says we must try to do a good deed every day to wash away the dirt from our souls. I don’t really know what a soul is but when our hut become too hot to stay inside, I make this drink and distribute among all those who are thirsty, makes me very happy! I made this myself….,” I noticed that she had placed her precious possession, the earthen cup right next to her and was looking at it anxiously from time to time, as if it would jump up and spill all its contents on the dry earth. 

“I always wash my hands and use boiled and cooled water,” she uttered like a parrot and I couldn’t help but smile. I was worried she would ask me to take her drink again but she did not. Humanity poked me in the ribs and I was thinking that maybe I could have one tiny sip, (after all, I was carrying all the necessary medication with me) but the bottled water hiding in my backpack chaffed at me and I gave up on the idea. Instead, I asked her what her name was. 

“Rumani.” She smiled her toothy grin again. “What’s yours?” I was amazed by her lack of inhibition towards me which was very uncommon in this part of the world. “Brett,” I told her. 

“What do you do?” Her questions came quickly and her eyes sparkled in her frank, brown face, as if I was her gateway to a magical world that she had never glimpsed before. I pointed to my camera. “I take pictures.” 

“Of what?” I could see curiosity bubbling in her and she gazed, in turn, at my face and at my camera in wondrous amazement. 

“Of people, places, animals, nature… anything that is interesting.” I glanced at my watch. It was getting late and I still had to cover a few kilometres to meet up with another photographer buddy who had been covering an Indian temple. The midday sun was blazing like a ball of fire and I felt little rivulets of sweat meandering down my face and back. The heat was penetrating slowly but surely and roasting my skin. It was almost too much to bear. She watched with keen eyes as I guzzled the cold water from my thermos. It was time to eat some lunch but the heat made me oblivious to hunger. Looking around frantically, I tried to find a means of transport….. bus, cab, anything that could take me to my destination but none were in sight. I cursed under my breath and glanced at my watch again. 

“Are you getting late?” she piped in her slightly shrill voice. I nodded, barely having the energy to talk. She stared at me for a minute or two. “You need to come with me, to my hut. It’s close by. I think you’re going to be sick.” 

“No!” That’s the last thing I wanted to do but she was right. I was distinctly starting to feel sick and nauseated. There was no tree in sight that was tall enough for shade, just a few shrubs scattered here and there which provided no solace from the oppressive heat. Feeling giddy, I stumbled and was about to fall, face first on the dry, reddish-brown soil but the girl rushed forward and placing her thin arms under my shoulders, succeeded somehow, in breaking my fall. As I knelt on the ground, holding my head in my hands, I saw her unfasten my backpack from my shoulders and rummage through it. 

“Ah! There she goes, the little thief!” I thought, alarmed and angry. “All that pretence and now stealing my stuff, taking advantage of my situation!” Thankfully, there was nothing of much value in the backpack except a spare t-shirt, a small towel, bottled water and my box of sandwiches. She could keep that if she wanted to. Even on the verge of losing consciousness, I could forgive her for stealing my stuff. She was needy, I could see that. If only I had the strength to sit up and call my friend for help! Out of the corner of my eye, I could see her still ransacking my backpack at lightning speed..... I had expected her to run with it! What was she looking for? 

Soon, she found the towel and without wasting a minute she soaked it with the cold water from my flask. She patted my face with the cold cloth, gently wiping my eyes with it. At first, I held her hand when she tried to take my shades off, but she clicked her tongue impatiently and scolded me for being childish. I noticed that she folded the sunglasses and tucked them carefully in the side pocket of my backpack. 

“Careful, now! Don’t sprain your neck! Lower your head slowly!” I did as directed and she hauled my backpack which was lying abandoned on one side, placing it under my head gently. She continued washing my face and neck with the cold towel and splashed some of the ice-cold water on my head. She ran her fingers through my hair repeatedly to spread the wetness all over and then bent over me to look into my eyes, worry and concern writ large on her sun-tanned face. I tried to smile encouragingly. 

“You feel better? Hmmm? Drink some water.” The girl knelt beside me and lifted my head to rest on her lap. She poured the water gently down my throat, combing my hair with her bony fingers and sprinkling cold water in my hair as she had done before. It was a little embarrassing but I was already feeling better. I felt strong enough to sit up. 

“Don’t!” She scolded and though I knew I was definitely feeling better, I decided to give in to the mother-like authority in her voice and the fierce look on her face. I abandoned my efforts of sitting up and smiled at her from my prostrate position on the hard, sun-caked earth. 

“Thank you for taking such good care of me,” I croaked. “I feel so much better. How old are you?” 

“Nineteen,” she answered carelessly and I was genuinely surprised. I looked at her malnourished body and her face with the slightly high cheek bones. “You’ve to come home with me. I need my mother to make sure you’ll be alright. You need a cool bath and…. do you have a phone?” she enquired, after a pause. 

“Look, I am alright. I really am! I can be on my way now.” I tried to assure her. My conscience kept chiding me for the thoughts I had about her being a thief but now I didn’t want to burden her and her family with looking after me. 

A hot breeze had started blowing and she seemed to get more restless. She dismissed my claims with a wave of her hand. “Give me your phone!” I fished it out of my pocket and handed it to her. 

“Amma works at the local health clinic here. The only one that takes care of the sick from three near-by villages including ours. She is usually very busy. None of us have a phone… no one in our village. But this health clinic has a phone so I will try to get her to help….” She waved her hand again when I started to protest, as if swatting an invisible fly and I sighed at her obstinacy. Meanwhile, she kept talking as she took off my canvas shoes and started sponging my feet with the towel, much to my displeasure. 

“That is the only phone here… for miles.. Oh! one more… the police station… which is the only police station serving the three villages here.” “Is your mother a nurse?” I asked, tentatively. My voice sounded better than before. 

“She is a doctor. Actually, the only doctor here for miles. She used to study in a college for doctors, she told me… in a very big city… in Bangalore! I’ve been there once…” she hesitated. “To meet my grandparents…my mother’s parents…” She was staring at the ground, and poking it with a stick absent-mindedly. Her countenance, though partially hidden, was clouded. 

She continued, as if compelled by some obligation. “They didn’t behave with us nicely. My grandfather didn’t speak a word to any of us… neither me, nor my parents… and my grandmother hugged me and cried a lot. My mother cried too. Grandma was the only one who gave me sweets… lots of sweets and bangles and a lovely dress. My father sat quietly in one corner, looking guilty as a thief.” 

She hesitated. “You see, appa is a farmer. Not much educated. He has a small piece of land here but…. farming isn’t easy in these dry regions.” I nodded. “Amma and appa fell in love when amma went to her father’s village. Then appa followed her back to the city. They wanted to get married but my grandfather wouldn’t hear of it. So, they eloped.” 

She started to giggle and made me smile. 

“In true Bollywood fashion, eh?” I countered. She nodded, happily. 

The positivity, goodness and innocence of this young woman whom destiny had deceived in so many ways struck me as extraordinary. 

“We are very poor but amma and appa says that the most important thing is we are happy.” 

She glanced at the phone in my hand and slapped her forehead with her palm, berating herself for her       distraction. 

“Yes, the number..” she closed her eyes and thought for a minute, then started to dial but the complex    touchscreen eluded her and she handed it back to me. She gazed attentively as I dialled the number and signalled for her to speak. Her face glowed with wonder and amazement as she saw the lights flicker, like a child who had just been given a magic wand! 

“You want one like it?” I had to find a way to repay this unexpected kindness. For a moment, her eyes glowed like embers. Then she smiled and shook her head in a no. 

“Too expensive!” She was holding the phone as if it was something sacred. “Not good for us!” 

Her mother arrived soon, together with her husband and they insisted I spend some time resting in their house. The husband nodded and smiled and I guessed he wasn’t conversant in English. Her mother, simple yet graceful, spoke to me and explained that I had suffered a heat-stroke, so it was best that I stayed indoors to avoid more damage from the intolerable heat. As there were no motels or lodges within miles, the mother and daughter insisted that I accompany them home. 

“We can’t offer you much,” she smiled, as I appreciated her graceful bearings, “but we just want to make sure you don’t suffer another heat-stroke. It’s only going to get worse if you try to keep walking in this heat.” 

I didn’t want a repeat of that episode so I did as I was told. The young woman turned on the only small, run-down table fan that produced more noise than cool air and stood on a wobbly table. Struggling, she dragged a heavy, wooden chair in front of it and in spite my protests, forced me to sit on it. A few of their neighbours arrived to behold the sight, elderly women offering words of advice, at least that’s what I guessed from their tone… school-age boys with bare torsos and shorts that hung loose, which they had to keep hitching up to avoid a wardrobe malfunction and teenage girls who peeked from behind the door and windows, giggling and shoving each other. I waved at one of them and she blushed furiously, then burst into a fit of giggles and disappeared behind the door. 

My young hostess returned with an earthen tumbler in her hand. “Oh dear!” I thought. “Not that again!” She smiled as she handed it to me.” 

She was distracted by the giggling girls behind the door and she shooed them away with a few angry words. “Don’t mind them…” she pointed to the door and shook her head in mock anger, “they have never seen a foreigner before!” I took a tiny sip from the tumbler and liked it immediately. It was nothing like I had ever tasted…. very different from the soda and the lemonade we buy from the stores. The cool earthen tumbler had lent the drink a distinct smell and flavour. I drank the rest in two quick gulps and looked up to see her smiling with satisfaction. 

“Like it?” She beamed. “Appa wanted to get some yogurt for you but amma wasn’t sure the milk would suit you…..” She took the tumbler from my hand. “I will make some more for you.” Without a moment’s hesitation, she pulled another bottle out of my backpack and ran to their tiny kitchen. 

As dusk set in, more people arrived with plates laden with food. The mother and daughter got busy serving me. They set them all down on a table made of steel that must have been borrowed from a neighbour, gathered around me and with their palms joined together, urged me to eat. It was an overwhelming moment. For the first time, I shed my inhibitions and worries aside and shared in their joy of being able to help me. It was like a glimpse of a different world, the happy faces, the toothless smiles, the kind words uttered in an alien language which Rumani tried her best to translate somehow left me speechless. I started taking pictures of them, the young and old alike. Rumani posed and giggled ceaselessly and I kept clicking her photos. I promised I would print the pictures and send them to her and she provided me with the address of her mother’s clinic. 

I had contacted my friend and he arrived soon after, looking worried and flustered but I had never felt so serene and peaceful before. As I stepped outside their hut, the crowd followed me to the car. I joined my hands in greeting and then turned to my hosts. Fishing out a couple of notes, I gestured to her father to accept them. He shook his head vehemently and uttered, “Atithi deva bhava.” Puzzled, I looked to Rumani for help and found her smiling. 

“The guest is the divine Himself,” she explained and all I could do was sigh and walk to the car. She walked beside me. 

Once I was inside, I looked at her face one last time. Her smile was beautiful and a sudden, unfamiliar emotion almost choked my voice. 

“Come with me!” I urged her. I could hear my friend gasp as a blush creeped up Rumani’s cheeks. She looked bewildered. Slowly, she turned around and walked back to where her people stood waving, as I stared silently at her retreating form. 

After a few days, I mailed the photographs I had taken. Behind one of her photos, I scribbled a quick note that I would be leaving India the following week and she should contact me if she needed any help in the future. I included my address and was sure I would hear from her soon. I did not. 

Years passed and Rumani stayed as an obscure presence in my mind. One day, I received a letter from her. 

“I am getting married next month.” she had written, “We, in our little village, often relive the happy memories we made with you and cherish the photos you sent us. Thank you.” 

I scanned the letter for more. She hadn’t signed her name but my eyes caught a few words at the bottom of the page that had been scribbled on with black ink in an attempt to hide them but could still be deciphered. I smiled. 

The words were: “Please sir, remember to wear a good hat. Yours Rumani.” 

(Word count: 3512) 

Biography: 

Joyeeta, (that is me) is a mother, teacher and life-long dreamer. She studied English Literature from the University of Calcutta, India and is passionate about music, reading and food but not necessarily in that order. Having stayed and taught in India, USA and Singapore, she believes that writing, along with music, dance or art enables self-expression. She is a child at heart and refuses to grow up. She resides in Singapore. 


