From: Manoj Mishra <mkmrie@yahoo.co.uk>
Date: 28 February 2018 at 18:11
Subject: Submission
To: "outofprintmagazine@gmail.com" <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>

One Fine Morning 

He was not his usual cheerful self that day. I was in the main market buying the green vegetables Arleen had asked me to bring while coming back from the office. He was also there buying potatoes. There was a time when he would always greet me with a broad, captivating smile. Whenever we met in the past, he would immediately invite me to tea. And then we would have tea in a nearby restaurant. We would talk for quite some time and then part. And while parting, he would never forget to invite me over. 

Neelkantha and I were born and brought up in the same village. We were next door neighbours. We studied together; we played together. We went to the same school and college as well. My father was a farmer, his father a teacher at the only school in the village. Everyone called him Guruji. 

Ours was a primary school. We didn’t have desks and benches in the classroom. We sat on the floor. Some of us, who were well off, carried our own sacks every day. We used to spread sacks on the floor and sit on it. We would carry our sacks back along with our cloth bags used for carrying books, notebooks and pencils. That was how we studied. Our classes began at 10 and would be over at four. Guruji would walk back with us every day. 

Many of the villagers were his students. He didn’t like many things, one being his students coming late to the class. I still remember there was a boy, who would always come late. He would not be late for more than fifteen minutes. When asked, he would invent stories. And he was always caned for being late. Guruji was never seen without his stick. He would pull a very small thin branch of an evergreen, flowery bush growing on the edge of the campus. He would enter the class with that in his hand. He would place it on the sill, survey the class and then ask each of us, “What did I teach yesterday?” That was how he always began. He would help those who needed it his way. He would not explain himself. He would ask one of us to explain it to him. And then he would ask that boy to explain it in his own words. That was his way. If he found anyone unable to communicate, he would ask many of us to explain. And then he would ask that boy to tell whom he liked the most and why. He would ask the class to learn from that boy. I remember once I was asked to explain a poem to one of us. When I had finished, I saw Guruji staring at me appreciatively. “He speaks very well. You must learn from him,” he had said to the class. Once satisfied with the progress, he would introduce the lesson. Now, this boy had learnt how to avoid the first fifteen minutes. He would come late. Guruji believed whatever he would say about his late coming, but after a week, he finally twigged that he came late everyday because he wanted to avoid the first fifteen minutes. One day he was late as usual. The moment Guruji saw him near the door, he almost shouted, “Catch him.” The boy immediately sensed danger. He ran as fast as he could. Boys ran after him. He disappeared without trace. They searched every nook and cranny, but he was not to be found. Guruji’s face was dark with rage. He kept tossing the stick in his hand as boys looked for him. “Guruji, he is there,” a boy pointed towards a dry well. We rushed there. Guruji peeped into the well. He was sitting on the floor of the dry well. He had used the rings fixed on the wall to go down the well. “Bring him up.” Some of the boys went down and pulled him up forcibly. He was beaten mercilessly that day. Guruji forgot to teach that day, the boy forgot to be late from the next day. “Spare the rod, and spoil the child,” he would often tell his colleagues. 

Guruji was the most respected man of the village. Villagers sought his help and advice whenever there was a problem. He was a different man at home, sweet, polite and forthcoming. He would meet everyone who went to him. Whenever there was a marriage in the village, he would be requested to supervise. And he would do it very well. He would decide who would do what. A girl’s marriage used to be a community affair in those days. The whole village used to participate. He would form groups of young men. Some of them would be asked to collect milk for days for preparing curd, some to procure green vegetables from local growers, some to look after the* barati*, some to manage water, some to supervise cooks, and some to serve. Everything was managed properly and smoothly. Those with limited means would even hand him over the money they had saved for the occasion. Guruji would spend it judiciously. There would be no problem despite dearth of money. He would hand over the detailed accounts he kept to the person concerned after the ceremony. His integrity was beyond doubt. If ever there was a dispute in the village and warring groups were formed, he would mediate and solve the problem amicably. He was never questioned or doubted. Nobody accused him of being partial or prejudiced. He didn’t discriminate. Once he held his son responsible for a mischief that had soon snowballed into a crisis. His son was appropriately punished in Guruji’s style. He was caned mercilessly in front of the whole village. If a villager needed to draft an official letter, he would go to him. And he would readily oblige. If anyone fell sick, he would be there for help and advice. 

Once, the village elders decided to solve a problem that had been taxing them for years. Poor villagers, men and women alike, were accused of stealing when they were invited to a *bhoj*. They would come with their lotas to drink water from. That was the tradition. Many of these invited guests would hide puris, sweets and other delicacies in their lotas. That would always cause a ruckus during and after each *bhoj*. Everybody knew it, but they did not know how to prevent them from stealing without offending or humiliating them. One day, a few days before a *bhoj,* some of the elders decided to meet him. They met him and told their problems. “We don’t want them to steal, but we don’t want to offend or embarrass them either. What should we do?” they asked him. He also listened attentively and patiently to one among them, who was highly agitated. He differed with the rest. He wanted people who steal to be exposed. “What will you gain if you expose them?” he asked. 

“They will forget to steal in future.” 

“You want them not to steal. Isn’t it?” 

“Yes.” 

“If that is what you want, why do you want to humiliate them when there are other ways available to stop stealing? And do you realize the impact the embarrassment would have on them?” he asked. The man looked visibly confused. The same Guruji was asking the same person whom he had punished many times at school not to insist on punishment. Guruji sensed his dilemma. “Lakhan, you come tomorrow in the morning. I need to say something to you.” Lakhan nodded obediently. Guruji now turned towards others and said, “There is a way out, decent and honourable. Tell the people when you send your messenger to invite them that they need not carry their lotas anymore. Each would be provided with an earthen glass to drink water from.” That sounded very nice and they readily agreed. That turned out to be the first *bhoj* with earthen glasses. And very soon it became one of the traditions of our village. The neighbouring villages followed it soon. 

Once, during a person’s grandson’s *mundan* ceremony, the ready-made kitchen set up was away from the place where the food was served. There were people to ferry the cooked food to that place. The person was a moneyed man by village standards. Despite adequate arrangements made by the host, the invited guests felt insulted. Everybody, including the host, marked that the number of trips made by persons ferrying food items was exceptionally low, the quantity brought was not even enough for twenty servings though there were fifty persons eating at that time in the hall, and the time taken in bringing them was equally annoying. The simmering discontent made the environment too heavy to bear. People started shouting. Suddenly a man sitting in the last row stood up to draw the host’s attention.  “If you can’t afford, why did you invite us?” one of the agitated guests shouted. The man felt deeply hurt and insulted. He rushed to Guruji who was sitting outside with others. He took him aside and narrated the whole incident. “I feel badly insulted,” he almost cried as he finished. Guruji went with him to the kitchen to inspect the arrangement. He spent half-an hour there. When he came out, he saw a few boys of the school playing there. He observed the distance between the two houses. He asked them to play in the space that lay between the two houses and came back. “Go now. The supply will increase,” he assured him. The supply increased immediately, leaving no room for murmur or discontent. The *bhoj *ended peacefully. Everyone was happy, except the man who had shouted the most. The next morning the person was at Guruji’s door. “What did you do to increase the supply?” 

“Not much. I smelt of fresh fried puris near a house while going with you to the kitchen. The cooked food from that place was being taken and stored there.” 

Neelkantha, whom I called Neel, and I went to the same school in a neighbouring town after primary. We went to the same college in that town. Our friendship continued even after that. We worked in the same town, but different offices. We would go to the village during festivals. We always celebrated our festivals in the village. We went and returned together. We were happily married. He married the girl Guruji had chosen for him. Mine was a love marriage. I still remember how the villagers reacted when they learnt that I wanted to marry a girl of my choice. Love marriage was a taboo in those days. My parents didn’t approve of it. When they learnt that the girl I wanted to marry was from another religion, they were shocked. My father even stopped talking to me. The news provoked a furious public response. Nobody was willing to listen to me. I was adamant, so were others. The village elders came in groups to brainwash me. During the whole debate, which lasted for about a month, Guruji didn’t intervene. Villagers went to him many times to share their anguish. They wanted him to talk to me. He didn’t.  Each time they went, they would come back empty-handed. They couldn’t understand his silence. They wanted him to act as he had done in the past on several occasions. 

“Why doesn’t he talk to Shamu? He would definitely listen to him. Only Guruji can make him change his decision.” They discussed his indifference each time they would come back after meeting him. My parents were adamantly opposed to my marrying a Christian girl. One fine morning, as I was sitting with ma, sipping tea and trying to persuade her to change her opinion, papa came out of the room for breakfast. When he saw me talking to ma in the kitchen, he lost his cool. “Tell your son, we won’t allow him to marry that girl. He will have to choose right now—she or us.” I didn’t say anything. I wanted both. My silence annoyed him further. He left the house in disgust. I knew he would go straight to Guruji. He gave a patient hearing. It was the first time Guruji had spoken on the issue. “Munna, I know it’s very difficult to change at this age.” He still called my father Munna. “You have lived your life the way you wanted. You have discharged your responsibilities very well. You have lived a meaningful life. You can look back at it and rejoice. This is his life. Let him live the way he wants. Give him the freedom he wants. Let him choose his way. He has grown up in a different world. Yours was different. Mine was entirely different. After all, it’s his life, not yours. Let him decide.” Papa listened to him patiently and came back home. He didn’t say anything to any of us. He drank a glass of water and went to the fields. That was his routine. He would go to the fields after his breakfast. He came back in the afternoon. He ate his lunch and had a siesta. He called me in the evening. “Do what you like.” That was all he said. The news spread like wildfire in the village. Villagers were shocked, but they accepted. The next morning Guruji called me. “Sit down,” he said as I entered the room. I sat on the edge of the chair and waited. 

“You better go for a court marriage.” 

I waited for him to say something more. 

“That’s all. You may go now.” I touched his feet and left.  As I was about to cross the threshold, I heard his voice “Shamu.” I stopped. He came close. “Learn to accept life,” he patted me on my shoulder as he said. I got married in the town. Nobody from the village came to the party I hosted after the marriage. My parents boycotted. Even Guruji didn’t come. Neelkantha also didn’t join. My wife’s family members and relatives also didn’t join. My wife and children never went to the village. They were ostracized. I went as usual as long as my parents were alive. Ma died six months after my marriage, papa a year after. Guruji lived long and died a contented man. 

Neel’s marriage was a traditional one. The girl was chosen by Guruji. She was from a neighbouring village. Her name was Savitri. People called her Sabo. Sumi was her only friend. Her name was Sumitra, but she was called Sumi. Sumi and Sabo were good friends. Sabo’s father was a farmer like Sumi’s. They were of the same age. They went to the same school. They played and studied together. The day Sabo learnt of her marriage she cried a lot. Sumi was equally inconsolable. They cried together. The day Sabo was to leave her parents’ house, she was inconsolable. Sumi’s condition was pathetic. She locked herself in a room and didn’t come out even when Sabo stopped on her way to meet her. She pounded on the door, but Sumi did not respond. Sabo could hear Sumi’s sobbing. When Sumi didn’t open the door despite Sabo’s requests, Sumi’s parents advised her to leave as the mahurat of leaving the village was going to be up soon. Sumi got married after a month. Sabo couldn’t attend her marriage as Neel was unwell and needed her constant care. Sumi’s in-laws turned her away after two years. She was accused of being barren. Her husband remarried a month after she came back to her parents’ house. Whenever Sabo went to our village, she would go to her village to be with her parents and Sumi. Sabo and Sumi cried when they met, they cried when they parted. They cried when they talked, they cried when they didn’t. 

Life moved on. Sumi lived an unhappy life; Sabo’s was a happy one. Sabo was a loving mother and a loving wife. She took good care of both her daughters. She was a good cook as well. Neel was fond of good food. She thought of what he liked, what he didn’t while cooking. Her daughters were fussy eaters. She kept their tastes also in mind while coking. There were no complaints, no conflicts. There was nothing more that Neel could have asked from God. Guruji was highly satisfied. “God has blessed Guruji for his noble deeds,” people would often say. When their daughters grew up, they got married. They settled in two different cities. His youngest daughter’s marriage was the last occasion on which we had met. We didn’t meet after that. And today when I saw him in the market, his behaviour was unlike him. His unusual behaviour haunted me the whole day. Arleen advised me to talk to him. I decided to meet him on Sunday. 

“Why did you leave that day so abruptly? You didn’t even tell me you were leaving,” I asked him the moment he answered the door. He didn’t answer. I found his silence scary. “Are you ok?” 

“Yes.” I felt there was something seriously wrong. I had been at his place many times. Whenever I went to see him, he would instantly inform Sabo of my coming. She would prepare tea for us and leave. She would go back to the kitchen. She would come back after some time with a tray in her hand which she would place on the table. “I learnt the recipe recently,” she would say. She would then talk of who she learnt from and when. “He liked it,” she would say, pointing towards Neel. She would even pack it for my wife and children. She would not let me leave without the packet. That was Sabo, hospitable, friendly, unassuming and transparent. 

His silence was threatening. 

“Is Sabo not at home?” 

“No.” His response scared me. 

I felt highly uncomfortable. 

“Where is she?” 

“She went to her village.” 

“So, it is her absence that is eating you?” I laughed heartily. He was visibly shocked. “Why don’t you call her back if you find the absence of a doting wife too painful to bear?” 

“She won’t come back.” It was my turn now to be shocked. I looked at him with a questioning look. 

“She left for good.” 

“What do you mean?” 

“She would live with Sumi. Sumi, you know, had been turned away by her in-laws. She lived with her parents. She had none left after her parents died.” Neel stopped to have a glass of water. “Sabo decided to live with Sumi for the rest of their lives. She decided to go and left. I was just informed. The day she left I went to the station to see her off. She was very kind and nice to me while leaving. She even waved at me when the train began to move; I waved back. I felt that she would come back after a month or so, and hence, I didn’t inform our daughters. She called me when she reached the village to inform me that she had reached safe. She went straight to Sumi’s house and not to her brother’s, who learnt everything only when I called him to know about her well-being. I tried to contact Sabo many times on the phone, but each time I called her, I found it switched off. Unable to contact her, I called her brother after a week. He was shocked to learn that she had left me in order to be with her friend, but he assured me that he would send her back home very soon. I felt relaxed. I waited for his call for a week, but when he didn’t call me, I decided to call him.” He stopped for a while to go to the kitchen, brought a bottle of water and two glasses. He drank a glass of water and resumed, “Her brother snubbed and ridiculed me when I called him. He told me that I was solely responsible for my predicament. He warned me not to call him again in the future.” He stopped to have another glass of water. “I still believed that she would come back very soon. I waited for three months for her to return, but when she didn’t return even after three months, I felt uneasy. I called my daughters and told them everything. They were angry with me for not informing them immediately after their mother had left. They decided to go to her village and talk to her.” 

“‘Don’t lose heart,’ they comforted me. ‘We will bring her back.’” 

“They sounded confident. Their confidence cheered me. They went and stayed with her for many days, requesting her to change her decision, but their mother didn’t relent. They eventually left the village, devastated and disgusted. Some of our villagers also went there to talk to her, but they also came back disappointed and aghast. Her own villagers even threatened to ostracise them, but she was unfazed. She told them point-blank that she will go to court if she was denied her right to life. They eventually left them to their fate and me helpless.” 

“What did she exactly tell you when you met her?” I interrupted when he stopped to wipe his specs. 

“I went to her many times. Each time I went there, I stayed with one of her neighbours. Her brother gave me a very cold response when I went there for the first time. I didn’t meet him after that. Each time I was there, I wanted to talk to Sumi, but Sabo would not let me do that. She would tell me each time I was there that she wanted to live with Sumi for the rest of her life, but I found her different when I met her last. My last visit was a month ago. I went and stayed with the same person I had stayed on previous occasions.” 

“‘Why do you come back every month?’” she asked me as she answered the door. 

“‘Can we sit together and talk?’” 

“Did you ever feel in the thirty years you lived together that she would leave you this way one day?” 

“No.” 

“Did she ever tell you that she was not happy living with you?” 

“No.” 

“You never felt that she was not happy with her life!” 

“No.” 

“OK. What did she say when you proposed that you need to talk?” 

“She moved aside to let me in. I pulled a chair for myself and sat down. She sat on the edge of the cot lying in that room. I waited for her to begin but when she didn’t, I started, ‘Sabo! I come here with the same request each month. I want you to come back home. You know we lived a very happy life. We never fought like other couples. We lived a happy, peaceful life. I still remember each mother-in-law in our village wanted her daughter-in-law to be like you. You were so much respected and adored. My mother used to thank Babuji almost every day for choosing you as my wife. I was very happy and so were our daughters. My friends and colleagues envied me. I confess there was not a single day in the thirty years we lived happily when I didn’t thank God for blessing me with a wife like you. It was so nice and peaceful. And then one fine morning you told me that you don’t want to live with me anymore. Sabo, I still don’t understand what prompted you to leave your home. Sabo, why don’t you come back? Did you find anything disgusting there?’” 

“‘Yes, the life I was forced to accept. That was not the life I wanted to live.’” 

“‘Did I ever force you to do anything?’” 

“‘What are you doing at this very moment?’” 

“‘Sabo, I just want you to come back home. It has been more than a year now. Please come back home.’” 

“‘I don’t force you to live your life the way I want. I never did that. Why do you force me to live my life your way?’” 

“‘Sabo, I promise there will be no reason for you to be unhappy, if there was any?’” 

“‘I lived a life that was not mine. I lived that life for thirty years. I don’t want to live that life anymore?’” 

“‘Are you not doing the same thing you have accused me of? Are you not forcing me now to accept what you want?’” 

“‘No. I just want to live my life my way. You live your life your way?’” 

“‘Are you happy here?’” I finally asked. 

“‘Yes.’” 

I sat still, looking at Neel as he narrated his last visit. 

“Go with your daughters to talk to her. Your going together might help,” I suggested as he stopped. 

“They won’t go.” 

“Why?” 

“I had requested them to go after my last visit. I wanted them to talk to their mother, but they refused straight away.” He stood up and went to the kitchen again to bring another bottle of water. He changed his seat and sat opposite me with legs spread wide on the floor. After a while, he said, “I accept it. That is what I have always been doing. Shamu, I was not a rebel like you. You married the girl you chose. I married the girl Babuji chose for me. I accepted his choice. Sabo decided to live with Sumi for the rest of her life; I accept it. My daughters decided not to have any truck with their mother anymore; I accepted it. They dumped me; I accepted it. Sabo deserted me; I accept it. I accept the life I have to live for the rest of my life. I am alone now; I accept it. And I accept now that Sabo won’t come back,” he said, staring at their marriage photo Sabo had hung on the wall thirty years ago. It was still there, reminding him of the years they had lived happily. 

A week later, I got transferred to Patna. We promised to remain in touch. He would call me religiously every fortnight. One fine morning, three months later, he called me when I was still in bed. 

“Shamu…” 

“Yes, Neel.” 

“Shamu…” 

“Yes Neel, what’s up?”  He sounded different. 

“Shamu…” 

“What’s the matter? Why don’t you speak?” His silence was scaring me. 

“Shamu, I left the job.” 

“Why did you….” He interrupted, “Don’t say anything today. Just listen to me. You have always listened to me. Listen for the last time. I am leaving the town.” 

“Where…” He interrupted again. “Please listen and don’t ask questions. When you come here, collect the key to my flat from the landlord. Keep the books and send all my belongings home. Collect the marriage photo and take it with you. You will find it in the Puja room and please do me a favour. Immerse that photo in the Ganga at Sultanganj.” 

“Where are you right now?” I sounded nervous. 

“Relax. The train has already left the town,” he said and disconnected. It has been ten years since that call. Sabo is still with Sumi, presumably happy. Neel didn’t come back. 

***** 

*About the Author* Dr Manoj Kumar Mishra was Professor of English with National Council of Educational Research and Training, New Delhi, India. His papers have been published in national and international journals. His publications include Young Aurobindo's Vision: The Viziers of Bassora and The Misunderstood Khushwant. He can be reached at mkmrie@yahoo.co.uk 

***** 