From: Pravin Vemuri <pravinvemuri@gmail.com>
Date: 1 March 2018 at 23:37
Subject: Submission
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>

*NO ESCAPE* 

Bokha kicks and kicks and kicks and the bike coughs and spits and sputters into life and KA-POW! the hash floods through with the zing of an electric charge from the blood-red chambers of my heart and I morph into freakin’ Superman: I can see through walls, the buildings above and the superstructures beyond them; I can utter a word, feel it circle the earth and echo back at me and I can smell everything and everyone from Bokha’s whisky breath to the odors of every moving creature including the police hiding in the nook right behind the wall of this dump. Salivating, eavesdropping, waiting for cheap fucks like us to get trashed and stumble out. The police is just one man and he smells of sweat and fat and brandy and greed – the stench of evil. I’ve spent lifetimes in its cold wet clutches. 

When I ride out of a place like that, I blast out. Call me reckless. But I’ve been nicked too many times by too many cops slithering behind corners. Reckless is the only reasonable alternative. Because, for one thing, these cops never chase. They are fat and lazy and short sighted. Because they’ve rightly figured that there’s yet another chump right behind you. 

Bokha thinks alike. He would’ve screamed out of that dump too. Except the bike we’ve bummed is a piece of junk. It won’t start for ages and then takes hours to warm up to any speed. The cop jumps us by grabbing the handlebar and driving us off the street. He seizes Bokha by his wrist. 

He asks us for the bike’s papers. Bokha shoves his hands in pockets and shrugs. I shake my head.         He asks us for money. Bokha sniggers and shrugs once more. I show him my pockets. We have nothing. No cash, no coin, nothing of value, nothing to lose. 

He says he will lock us up for the night. 

Bokha scratches himself under his ear and laughs. We’ve got nowhere to be *mister*, he says. 

Rookie mistake. You can’t appear joyful – self-effacing: yes, embarrassed: sure, but never happy. Bokha knows better but he’s been loopy all day. He’s been railing against God and Government. Bullying others at the church: stealing their cigarettes, insulting their intelligence, reminding them how useless they all are. 

But the cop lets it slide. Where will you go if I let you off, he asks. 

Well, constable-saab, I don’t know. Maybe you could tell us where your lovely wife would be right now, Bokha says and laughs and gets himself hit in the head. Twice. By that metal-tipped stick that cops ought not to carry. Or use. They are meant for cattle, those things. 

Bokha hits the ground hard. He’s out before the stick comes to a rest. There’s a bit of bleeding but he hasn’t gotten his head bashed in. He’ll live, I think. He’s survived worse. 

The cop screams for us to get the hell out of there. He falls back and hovers about. A bit scared, I think. I crouch next to Bokha and hold my head in my hands. What have you done! I yell. *Poor innocent boy! Poor child of God!* The whiskey helps with the drama and with the total numbing most of my face. I totter on my haunches and scream away. 

The cop shivers a little and walks a circle around us. He’s jumpy. He glances behind us towards the bar. No one’s left the place after we did. The lights have been switched off and whoever’s inside has decided to stay put. 

Seen many of you, the cop hisses. You always find a way. 

I see him better now that he’s standing under the light atop the hoarding that hangs over the gate. He’s heavy browed and spotted with sweat with features that don’t seem well put together – all rough lines and garish curves. He’s chewing and spitting tobacco. His name-strip says *something* Gowda. 

Seen all of *you* – bloody druggies, he says and spits again. 

That’s when I place him. From that time Bokha and I got busted scoring a lick of crystal in exchange for a bottle of brandy we swiped from the wine shop right behind the police station. Stupid move. It’s downright masochistic, in fact, to steal from the place the police drink from. But, in our defense, we were irrevocably, irreparably high. Granted, that’s always our defense. Point is: we were stoned out of our skulls; before, after and during. They found us inside the hour. In the shadows behind the Marthoma church two streets out. We were laid out, our brains cracked and scrambled. They dragged us out and tossed us into the holding cell. We had no money. We never did. And no one to come get us. We weren’t even worth hitting or screaming at. Not that it stopped them. Although they seemed to feel sorry for us after a while. Tossed a couple of cigarettes our way. Either that or they couldn’t take any more of Bokha’s nagging. In the morning they threw freezing water to rouse and kick us out. 

Bokha’s begun to moan. The cop lets out a low grunt. Make him stop, he yells. 

I kneel next to Bokha. He seems to be coming around. You got any water? I ask him. 

You think am carrying fucking water *here*? 

Then I need to go get some, I say and make my way back inside the bar. My head’s begun to throb to a split. I can feel pain pool around my eyes. Cheap whisky can do that. Inside, its pitch dark and it takes me a bit to find my way. There are people in there, drinking with the lights off. I can hear them breathe and taste their resentment. I ask if there’s a door at the back but no one makes a sound. The place smells of urine and unwashed clothes. I shout for help but nothing stirs. Outside the cop’s begun screaming. So, I begin to yell for help and they keep drinking as if the dark could snuff out sound as well. In the blackness I can feel them glaring at me. You motherfuckers are heartless, I snarl back. They’re rough men, truckers, who probably don’t speak any language I do. You will burn to dust in the fire pits of hell, I scream at them. The whisky and the hash burn in and deepen my paranoia and I start yelling and kicking things around until the kid who serves peanuts in that dump hands me a bottle of water and begs me to leave. Whatever you do, he pleads, don’t let him in here. 

When I return the cop’s gone. Ditto for Bokha. Same for the bike. 

The day had started fantastic. I’d found the wallet in the gutter behind the church wall. Bokha had nicked the bike from around the corner because some idiot left the keys in. It was simply our day: there was some money inside the wallet and a spot of petrol in the old Suzuki two-stroke. Bokha began screaming that he was the king of the world, throwing his hands up like a boxer and lifting his shirt the way he does when he’s happy or high. For half of what we found, we bought military grade hashish and stuffed it down our pants and sped down the streets. We winked and whistled at the college girls and sang bawdily and screamed ‘Fuck America’ and jumped and danced because we were so very happy and all we needed was a stiff drink. 

Well, now, Bokha’s dead. Or dying. Or worse. The streets are dark and desolate and the occasional lamps are spluttering flies. I’ve nowhere else to be so I start trailing the tread marks, desperately hoping the cop moved on and I could at least find the bike abandoned somewhere. Was I angry at Bokha? *Nah.* I probably should be, I guess. But am too tired from all the shouting and the kicking which has burnt the worst of the whisky out of my blood and has allowed the hash to settle in real nice. I drift a bit from the waist up. It’s a feeling as familiar as the earth I walk on. I hunt for this feeling in every second of every day. 

I couldn’t have been mad at Bokha even if I wanted to be. Ours was a friendship of convenience. We met a week to the day the cops had busted us, scavenging the same church for the occasional free meal and bumming cigarettes off old men who were too pious to deny anyone within fifty feet of the place. We met because he walked up to me to tell me that I talked funny. Out of the blue. Like in a movie. I was born that way, I told him. Which is a lie, of course. I had grown an American accent by the virtue of living there for close to a decade. Right out of college. I’d been accepted at UCLA for my Masters. And hired by a mid-sized tech firm off campus. With stock options. Picture perfect stuff. The plan was to keep plugging at it. Nose to the grindstone. Eke out every penny etc. But I guess I wasn’t built for it. In my defense, I worked as if I was on acid in the beginning (which ironically is the only drug I haven’t tried). Hundred-hour-week, nights, weekends etc. And drank to take the edge off. Two years of incessant deadlines and constant downward spiraling and I was smoking speed and from there to the American dream in crystalline form i.e. methamphetamine. Which, if you didn’t know already, is man’s answer to an omnipotent God who doesn’t give a shit. 

They fired me with the year when I started showing up to work only after lunch, often delirious. And then sometimes not even that. I was fired from the next one in under three months. Then another one after that which led to a rather spectacular meltdown in a deserted men’s room in the middle of the Nevada desert and a hasty return home. 

I find them a few hundred meters away. All of them – the cop, Bokha and the bike. Bokha’s atop on the bike driving it at a slow pace and waving the cop’s stick, putting on a show. The cop’s ploughing slightly ahead of him. When he sees me, Bokha lets out a loud, exultant shriek. 

*Come*, he yells, *come*, sit on the bike with me. He eyes shine like something feral. 

No! I scream back. Let him go! 

Coward! he sneers. 

Gowda’s sweating like a pig. He’s bleeding from the side of his head and his uniform’s torn at his shoulder. When he turns toward me, in the uneven light, his face looks comical, like a mime’s. But I can tell it’s because he’s in shock. Then I see the whites of his widened eyes and the dread of death in them. When he slows to catch his breath, Bokha hits him. On his rump, on his head and then on his shoulders. Gowda squeals and yells for us to stop before it’s too late. You can’t fuck with cops, he wheezes. Bokha hits him on the side of his face. It makes a sound of wood on wood. Then he hits him viciously on his ear. Gowda howls and falls down his knees. 

I scream once more to let him go. Let’s get the hell out of here, man! Out of this town! 

Bokha laughs again. There’s no malice in his voice. Just unadulterated joy. When he was in school he had become infamous overnight for drawing the principal’s face onto the boy’s urinals so that you could pee into his mouth. I can’t remember how that story ended but he insisted that they’d never caught him. 

Bokha freezes when we hear the truck roaring behind us. 

I turn around to the sound and it almost blinds me even though truck’s still some distance away. But it’s steaming in, its headlights cutting giant halos in the black of the night like a pair of avenging angels. 

Friends of *yours*? Bokha says and laughs. 

I *really* hope not, I think to myself. My pulse quickens and I hold my breath like I am deep under the sea. The truck closes in like a twist of fate. 

Are you all right? Bokha yells. 

I shake my head. I walk towards the side of the road and start running into the fields. 

Where are you going? Bokha screams behind me. 

I don’t stop. I don’t look back. I simply run with whatever fight’s left in me. 

I run until the sounds drown out. Until the night shrouds everything and I can hardly see.      Until I hit a low branch or something and roll over and pass out. Well, I don’t know if I passed out the very instant but the next thing I know, am four years old and it’s evening on a Saturday and dad has popped me onto a chair and he’s carefully removed my shoes and he’s handed me bowl of instant noodles. Mom’s not around. That’s how I know it’s a Saturday. Saturdays are when she prays in the evenings. 

What do you want to see, dad asks having picked up the remote. 

Masters of the Universe! I squeal. 

He laughs and flips through the channels until he finds it. 

Later he sits me down and takes me though the paper. Points out cricketing stars – Kapil, Gavaskar, Richards. He’s a big fan of Vishwanath himself. My mother keeps popping in and out. Pats me on the head. Hands coffee to my father. We laugh about something my father says in a funny voice. Then am back on dad’s lap and he has the sports section open again. 

You want to be one of them when you grow up, don’t you he points to pictures of Indian cricketers and teases. 

Nope, I tell him and jump to the floor. I want to be He Man, I say and draw an imaginary sword and hold it up. Dad heaves me up and rubs his moth in my belly and his beard bristles my skin and I cringe and I squeal and he holds his head back and laughs. His voice is deep as a cavern and sonorous. Its intensely nostalgic. I cry in my sleep. I don’t know how I know this. But I do. 

The dream is not based on a real event. I’ve made up parts of it. Maybe all of it. 

I wake up hot and broken and sore. Just the like the day around me. I wake to what I think are sirens. Am in the middle of acres of tilled land. My clothes are grimy. They smell of mud and manure. Every muscle in my body is sore. My head’s pounding like a machine and my throat’s bone dry. I must have been miles away from civilization. The only thing I can make out is direction I had come in from. Then I hear the sirens again, so I get up and begin running in the opposite direction. There’re acres after acres of paddy all around me. It’s almost noon and scorching hot. I drink from every pump or tap I can find. The farmers have finished their work in the early hours of the day as is the practice in these parts. There isn’t anyone to point me in any direction. Just a few stray animals lying prone in the shadows. I cut across them all. 

For a while, when I returned from States and spent some ‘alone time’ at home, I really tried. Cut myself off from everything and then enrolled into all kinds of programs – yoga, meditation, all that. But it got too depressing. I was self-piteous all the time. My parents didn’t help to negate that feeling – they were either too sensitive or too impatient with my recklessness. After an insufferable couple of months, I broke bad. And free. Been on the road ever since. 

I must have run and walked for hours before I hear noises of traffic and follow them to meet the road. I know this road, I’ve come this way on some drunken jaunt. There’s a bus stand just north of where I am. I’ve twenty rupees in my underpants, the last of last night’s largesse. Just enough to eat and buy a ticket. 

When I reach the stand, I buy a pack of biscuits and a ticket to the next town. I go by the corner where everyone smokes and start picking out stubs that still have something left in them. I smoke about a dozen stubs before I burn my throat and choke my eyes. In the end I reek of stale tobacco but I feel calm and sorted out. The first bus out of the place is yet to come, so we crowd around the platform circling and readying to get inside the bus as soon as it arrives and grab a seat. There then, among those lucky enough to find a spot on the only bench on the platform, is the kid from the bar. The one who served us peanuts. He’s hunched over, holding his head in his hands. When I come closer I see the bruises on his hands and face, they are scabbing real bad. Somebody had beat the crap out of the poor fella. 

Hey kid, what happened to you, I ask him when I get closer. 

He shakes his head. He doesn’t look up but he knows it’s me. I can see his face’s all puffed up and he has been crying. 

Where are you going? I ask him. The kid shakes his head again and makes a sound so terrible, it nearly breaks my heart. His shirt’s all grimed up and his pants are torn from the side. I couldn’t say for sure but one of his legs seemed broken. 

I could tell the kid’s got no ticket. Probably no money either. The bastards must have held him down and kicked him around. I touch his hand lightly and walk back and stand in the corner again. 

Am not much of a Christian. I’ve always believed religion is an evil construct created for the strong to feel guilty for those less fortunate. Probably because I have mostly been on the side that has been more privileged. 

But, well, I guess I’ve been hanging around churches for too long. I knew for some time now, that it was going to come back and bite me in the ass. Make me sorely regret it. Ah, well, fuck it and fuck this loathsome planet. I walk back to the kid and pull his hand out and stuff my ticket into it. He looks up finally and nods. His eyes are swollen, one’s shut from pain and his lips are cut and cracked. 

Is that all I get? I say and laugh. If the gesture is supposed to make me feel good, it doesn’t work. I feel like I’ve always felt: lousy and listless. I return to the corner to pick up more half smoked cigarettes and begin to burn my mouth and eyes and throat. 

When the bus arrives there’s clamoring, screaming and shouting. The kid limps about and gets in somehow. He doesn’t look back or anything. Just sits down and lowers his head. When the bus leaves the place falls quiet and empty. 

I walk around some more because I feel the need to scratch all over but that’s never a good idea. I walk until am tired and I go the bench and sit at the same place I’d found the boy. Hoping that it would bring some luck. I hear the sires again. I hear them come and go. Maybe it’s all in my head. I look up at the board, at all the different places the buses could take me. I could go anywhere. Anywhere at all. Because frankly, there’s really nowhere I would rather be. 

*BIO: Pravin has been published previously in Out of Print, Earthern Lamp and Spark magazines. He is based in Bangalore* 

Thank you, Pravin 