From: Hampi Chakrabarti <hampi.chakrabarti@gmail.com>
Date: 12 March 2018 at 20:53
Subject: SUBMISSION
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Author's Bio: 

Hampi Chakrabarti was born and brought up in Ranchi and lived in the ancient city of Varanasi. Currently she is putting life to service as a writer with The Art of Living in Bengaluru. With a PhD. in English Literature, she is trained to pursue the depth and finesse in understanding of a subject. As a spiritual seeker, her writing is an expression of her search for the core essence and unexplored possibilities of life. As part of Sri Sri Ravi Shankar’s publications team, the books she has worked on are, Unknowing the Known: Talks on Karma (2017), India in Action (2017), Sex.Life.Spirituality (2018), Contradictions in Bhagavad Gita (2018). She has published works in siyawoman.com, Muse India, International Journal of English Language, Literature and Humanities and several other platforms. A lover of road trips, tall trees and bird watching, she jealously guards her me-time. 

Short fiction: 

*LIZARD BLIZZARD* 

It was pride unparalleled and there was joy to match it. It all began the evening, uncle, father’s elder brother, read the momentous announcement in the newspaper that television would be launched in Ranchi. It was the year 1984; Ranchi, then in the state of Bihar, was still not a state capital with oodles of capital investment and the enigma of moving images in your drawing room was still enigmatic. Uncle, a successful man by all rights, promptly decided he ought to own one of those things he had heard so much about. 

Thus on a Monday evening, the whole family set out to bring home what would be the apple of their eyes for many years to come.  It was a mighty Uptron TV. It had tinted blue glass screen hidden behind wooden sliding doors that were adorned with glossy honey coloured sunmica. Sliding doors gave the feeling of rising curtains for a play; it was regal to say the least. Once home, the TV was stationed on an equally regal looking carved wooden table in the drawing room. You could not have it anywhere else in the house as your lesser privileged neighbours had an equal right over it. It was an honour to share this piece of magnificence with all and sundry. 

The inauguration was a gala affair replete with Grandma, the eldest of the family, cutting a red ribbon that was wrapped around the TV with scores of neighbours and the family in attendance. My mother blew the conch shell, as was the Bengali custom, while grandma completed the worship rituals with sandalwood, incense and red hibiscus flowers. Father had already positioned himself at a strategic point, armed with his camera, determined to capture every moment of this momentous day. Uncle mingled around with the guests, sincerely sharing with them nuggets of trivia about his prized possession. Thus began the family’s sojourn with their beloved television. 

Some years down the line the family was blessed with another addition - me. I was welcomed with as pomp and celebration as the coveted Uptron; or maybe even a little more. Soon enough, with the passing years, I made good friends with the TV. But by then neighbours had stopped dropping by to watch the TV shows; everyone owned their own TV. Even Sombari,our washer woman owned one. 

One fine day, on a summer afternoon, I had just returned from school and my mother was trying her best to shove some morsels of lunch down my throat. Just then Grandma’s loud shriek made all of us drop everything and run towards her. 

“Tiktiki! Tiktiki!” Mother screamed aloud pointing towards a lizard running hither and thither on the living room floor as grandma gasped for breath. All of us, including the poor lizard looked terrified. But before father could fetch the broom, the lizard had found cover. A lizard hunt immediately commenced but to no success. 

“Where did it come from?” Father asked Grandma. 

She looked nonplussed. “It came out of the TV.” 

“What! Ma!” 

“You don’t believe me?” She immediately retorted. “I opened the TV door and it jumped out of the TV.” 

“Ok, let me know if you see it again.” 

Father went back to his study without paying much attention to Grandma’s explanation. Mother held my hand and dragged me back to the unfinished lunch. Grandma, although still looking terrified, went back to switch on the TV. 

My mind was not at rest. Did the lizard really come out of the TV? All my friends had televisions but I was not sure if they had lizard throwing televisions. I couldn’t understand how the adults could go back to their mundane lives after this intriguing discovery. I resolved to find out more about it once the elders had resigned themselves to their seita. 

Within the next forty minutes the household was enveloped in the silence of slumber. I sneaked out from under my snoring mother’s grip and tiptoed towards the living room. Taking a pensive look at the television, I tried to figure out from where to start the investigation. The honey-hued sunmica was chipped in places and the handlebar had turned rusty. Where the lizard could have jumped out from, I wondered. Careful not to allow any sound to escape my movements, I stealthily threw open the TV’s gliding door. 

Nothing happened. No lizard jumped out of the TV. I closed the gliding doors as silently as I could and opened them again. Still no lizard. My doubts about Grandma were reinstated. I had always felt she was not from the real world. Hence dejected, I sneaked back into the bed, beside my snoring mother. But there had been a lizard on the floor. All of us had seen it. It must have come from somewhere. I tried counting all possibilities. The TV seemed a most unlikely option though. Still, I could not discard it without proper investigation. 

Nevertheless hours rolled by and it was late evening. Father sat supervising me as I tried hard to befriend the multiplication table for five. And it happened again! This time it was mother who shrieked. I lifted up my head to find mother running towards us. 

“Tiktiki! Tiktiki!” 

“Where?” Father asked without the least expression on his face. 

“Came out of the TV.” Mother’s voice quivered. 

Father looked nonplussed all over again. 

“Don’t just sit there and stare. Do something.” Mother shouted. 

Lizard hunt ensued all over again but to no avail. This time it had managed to take cover even before we had spotted it. Now mother and grandma were a team; not a very ideal situation for father. I felt sorry for my poor father and resolved to take things in my hands at the earliest opportunity. And lo! Opportunity presented itself sooner than I had thought. Post the fiasco Mother had refused to switch on the TV and thus everyone went to bed early.  This gave me added time for my investigation. 

Once again armed with a torchlight, I stealthily made my way towards the TV. Lizards have never given me much of a fright, but today maybe it was the eerie silence of the night or the challenge of the circumstance, my heart did skip a beat. With all my senses at the peak of their vigilance, I slowly slid the gliding door of the TV. My heart beat faster as I slid it further. 

And there, I saw something fly out of the TV and before I could see where it had landed, I shrieked. I shrieked at the top of my voice and jumped. The torchlight flung out of my fist and landed on the carpet, illuminating the pathway that lead up to the living room. Needless to mention, I had managed to wake up the entire family. 

“The lizard jumped out of the TV”, I blurted out even before the questioning had started. 

Father had had it enough since morning. Without looking at me he stood near the TV and shut the TV’s gliding door with a force. I feared my old friend might not be able to withstand father’s wrath. Father repeatedly shut and opened the door, but no lizard jumped on him. 

“Where is the jumping lizard?” He shouted. 

Grandma, mother and I stood silently in camaraderie. We had no answers. 

“And what were you doing here at this hour?”  He chided turning towards me. 

This time mother and grandma sided with father and I was the only criminal left to be punished. And as a punishment I was left in the dark living room with the lizard. Well, I never said my parents knew the art of punishment! I conjured up a sombre expression; hoping my expression expresses apology. But I was cautious not to look sorry enough for me to be forgiven tonight. Lying on the couch, I waited impatiently for the snores to rise higher. I knew well that within half an hour someone will come and take me back to the bedroom. The investigation would have to be concluded before that. 

Thus, as soon as the snores were loud enough, I tiptoed towards the TV. Father had taken away the torchlight, so I had to rely on the meagre street light flowing in from the window. Slowly I slid open the gliding door. 

And there it was! 

A lanky, latte-coloured lizard stood there breathing heavily as it clung on to the blue glass of the screen. We stared intently at each other. Neither of us moved. Maybe if I moved, it would have jumped again. How do you really convey to a lizard that you don’t mean harm. I wish I was equipped to speak lizard. And then it made the first move; slowly and then swiftly it ran towards the inner edge of the sliding door and hid itself between the folds. I could still see it and see its big bulgy eyes fixed on me. I guess I had succeeded in convincing it of my goodwill; it hadn’t yet jumped on me. I figured out that my friend Uptron was home to the Lizard. I decided to call it Lizu and I also decide that Lizu was a ‘she’. Lizu was special, she was my first pet. I would care for her.  Now only if I had a way to tell her not to jump on my mother and grandma. That way she would be safer.  I couldn’t help but tiptoe to the kitchen. I returned with a pinch of biscuit crumbs and placed them at the inner corner of the sliding door. It was Lizu’s dinner. Having taken care of everything I went back to the couch to be picked up and taken to the bedroom fifteen minutes later. 

Next day being Sunday, I knew the family will gather around the TV for their morning ritual of ‘Rangoli’. Therefore I woke up early and before anyone got there, I opened the TV door, careful not to scare Lizu. She was still there looking at me. I put some breakfast for her. Uncle came from behind me and gave me an inquisitive look. 

“I want to switch on the TV before others.” I said. 

Uncle gave an endearing smile, pinched my cheeks and went out of the door. I breathed a sigh of relief; Lizu was safe for now. I knew my family’s TV viewing schedule and for the day managed to open and close the TV, without anyone suspecting anything. 

Next morning when no one was watching, I again put some breakfast for Lizu . But then I was packed off to school. The whole day at school I remained restless. What if someone scares Lizu; she will jump again and be discovered. What if father manages to get her with his broom? I shuddered at that thought. I planned that the next day I will feign being sick and stay back home to make a proper home for Lizu.  I waited impatiently for the school day to end so that I could go home and check on Lizu. I will not share her secret with anyone. Once home, I approached the Uptron with a thundering heart. Will Lizu still be there? 

And she was there! What more, she had found herself a spot further down the sliding door where no one could discover her. I was elated at her smartness. She ought to be my pet. When the elders resigned to their siesta, I put some lunch for Lizu. During the day I had browsed through the volumes of encyclopaedias lined up in the school library. I had found out that lizards ate insects. I knew where to find some dead dragonflies near the school toilet. I had saved them for Lizu. She would be happy. I would take good care of her. 

A week went by and our friendship grew stronger. Uptron, Lizu and me. I had made a database of every corner of the school building where food for Lizu was readily available. That day I picked up a brown moth from under the tall lamp by the playground. I came back home from school with alacrity in my heart and a spring in my feet. I was rarely any different. 

As I walked through the iron gate, the sight of an upturned Uptron under grandma’s red hibiscus tree welcomed me home. 

“Don’t go near the TV. It’s kept out for repair. We cleaned it today. What a rickety old dirty thing it has become with insects rotting in it.” Grandma said. “And I also found the lizard. It won’t give us a scare anymore.” She added. 

“I don’t understand why we need to repair this one when there are new colour TVs in the market.” Mother said pulling me toward the dining table. 

-- Warm regards Dr. Hampi Chakrabarti +919838427209 +917004144397 