Too simple? 

Here's the story: *A Lie* A long time ago, when I was innocent, I pickled a lie. 

Mummy’s golden watch wasn’t made of gold. I didn’t know that at the time. The links that clinked together to form a golden bracelet around her wrist made a magpie out of me. 

Mrs. Kumar, our grade two class teacher, let us vote for our class picnic’ destination. Robber’s Cave held all the allure of an undiscovered paradise. It won unanimously. 

The school bus cackled excitedly. When no one was looking, I took Mummy’s watch out of my bag pack and clinked the clasp. It hung loosely on my wrist. 

The gushing stream, chattering its way through rocks and boulders, swallowed our excited shrieks as we traversed through the cave from one end to the other. Sometimes, an obese rock would pop up right in the middle of the stream with its puffed up cheeks and challenge us to carry on. 

I heard the clink of a link, a faulty clasp, many hours later, after I’d reached home tired and exhausted. 

It sounded far off, back in the cave, on a fat rock I had wanted to climb but couldn’t. Amu was on top of the rock: her stretched hand and creased forehead relaying her instructions to me. It was impossible to hear what she was saying even though her mouth was making loud shapes. The rock was huge and slippery. Green moss clung to its underbelly. I stretched my foot as if I was climbing over a tall fence before my soggy shoes found a soft contour to use as a ledge. Amu pulled me up. 

A glint. I tried to remember if the sun was hitting the watch or the ring on Amu’s finger. Something had sparkled. The remembered incandescence of that fragment of a moment on a big, mossy rock woke me up with a jolt the day after the class picnic at Robber’s Cave. The absence of Mummy’s golden watch stretched wide and heavy across that particular Sunday. 

A week went by. Logic had led the family to look in all the usual corners. Common sense had made Daddy and Mummy ask the children and Shanti. 

Mummy’s watch was nowhere to be found. 

“But it wasn’t even an expensive watch Simmi…” Daddy’s logic had not turned into panic and mistrust like Mummy’s. He was reading the Sunday Times and trying to keep the peace of his day off from shattering. 

I kept my truth covered under a blanket. 

It felt safe there, so safe that it didn’t make a sound, not a peep. My truth behaved like me around Mummy’s anger. 

Monday followed Sunday like it always does. 

“Three years of service! Three long years of trust and this is the thanks I get!” My sister and I found Mummy sobbing to Daddy when we got back from school. “I loved her like family.” 

It was odd to find Daddy at home. It was early evening and for a split second it felt like Monday was borrowing some leftover moments from Sunday: happy moments when Daddy’s home. 

Our parents were sitting at the dining table. Shanti didn’t come out of the kitchen with water for us to drink. Odd, I thought. 

Odder still were Mummy’s tears. I had never seen them before. My mother hated tears and people who shed them. She often said so, especially when my sister or I cried, even if it hurt a lot, like when my knee had bled for hours after I’d fallen off my bike when I was learning to ride it for the first time. Mummy had told me off for crying. Shanti had brought a bottle of Dettol and gauze to wash the wound. It stung. 

Daddy’s voice was soft. 

“You love her like family.” I heard him saying as I tried to turn invisible around my parents. Invisible and inaudible. 

“That’s not the point!” my mother shrieked through her sobs and shut Daddy up. 

“I cannot live with lies Raj! I refuse to. And to think of all that I’ve done for her…” She stated clearly. 

I slipped out and so did my sister. We took cold bottles of water out of the fridge and gulped them down. We didn’t use glasses. We didn’t see the point. Mummy wasn’t in the kitchen. 

“When you choose your actions, you choose the consequences too.” Daddy often told us, his two daughters, whenever he needed to point us towards our homework or away from our fourth helping of Shanti’s delicious *kheer *(rice pudding). 

Shanti, our housemaid, had come to live with us when her husband had thrown her out of her house. He was an obnoxious drunk who beat her often and took her wages from her almost as soon as she had earned them. 

“Why do you put up with it?” Mummy, like the rest of us, found Shanti’s loyalty as a wife baffling . “Where else will I go Bibiji? Who will support me?” 

“But you support the family Shanti! You!” I’d lost count of the number of times Mummy had told her the truth as we saw it. 

Then one day Shanti’s husband brought a new wife, a girl from his village, and told Shanti to leave. She found her clothes stuffed in the old VIP suitcase, the grey second-hand one Mummy had given her, outside her mud house one evening when she reached home after work. Her husband and his new wife didn’t open the door. Shanti and her ten year old daughter, Sunita, slept outside their door that night. The next morning they moved into our spare room. 

Mummy’s kitty group praised Mummy’s generosity every time they met, once a month. We never went to those kitty parties but Mummy always told us how impressed her friends were when we all sat down to dinner together. She would quote her friends verbatim. Daddy would nod. We would follow his lead. Shanti would hear snippets of Mummy’s friends’ praises as she stepped in and out of the dining room serving us hot *chapattis* off the *tawa.* 

Over the years, Mummy became Shanti’s banker, guide, and almost a friend. 

“Why don’t I open a bank account for you?” Offered Mummy one day. “It will be easier for you and even if we leave this town, you’ll have somewhere safe to keep your money.” 

“If he finds out, he’ll kill me.” Stated Shanti without looking up from the sink. She was washing dishes. The tap was running. The steel plates clanged loudly. 

Mummy kept quiet. 

“I’m a mother Bibiji…*mein maan hun* …as long as Sunita can go to school. She should not end up like me Bibiji.” She even managed a smile. Her dark skin stretched over her high cheekbones. White teeth peeped through dry lips and her large kohl rimmed eyes creased into submission. “*Meri kismet*...” She acknowledged her destiny as a matter of fact. 

Then that Monday arrived, the one that followed the Sunday which had followed the week of looking for Mummy’s watch and not finding it. 

*Kismet* showed her hand. 

Curiously, consequences let go of actions. Or they haunted the wrong person, I thought. I didn’t dwell on Daddy’s theory. I was young and innocent, not capable of guile and lies. 

Shanti, the maker of delicious sweet *kheer*, lost her job and her livelihood. 

My dormant truth lay still, deep inside and pickled into a lie. 

Shanti left without a goodbye. We never spoke of her or about her at home. Mummy found a new project to feed her time. Sometimes, Shanti’s large, kohl rimmed eyes seep into my dreams and almost always a glint of something bright, something that almost blinds me, something that looks like gold but isn’t, jolts me awake. ---- *A brief biographical sketch:* I grew up in Dehradun and graduated from SRCC, New Delhi, before accepting a job with British Airways as a check-in agent in 1992. After becoming a mother, I trained to become a teacher in England where I taught primary school children for eight years. Moving to Qatar in 2010 presented me with an opportunity to qualify as an English language instructor to teach English to the local police personnel. Apart from writing, I’m happy when I’m reading, gardening or taking photographs. I blog regularly about travel, poetry, life and art on: https://artismoments.blogspot.qa/ The short story form appeals to me so I like to read as many as possible and try to craft a few of my own. My short story, Jamun Tree, was published on Kindle Magazine in 2015: http://kindlemag.in/jamun-tree/ 

-----Original Message----- Sent: Thu, Mar 29, 2018 1:41 pm 

Please check the guidelines - we do not open attachments. Please cut and paste the story into the email as per the instructions. 

On 19 March 2018 at 15:22, <ashisharti@aol.com> wrote: 

I'd like to submit my short story 'A lie' for publication. 

This story is set in Dehradun, Uttaranchal, India in the late seventies and it explores a moral dilemma faced by an eight year old. The blurring of right and wrong in the context of self preservation is the premise of this story of 1277 words. 

I currently live in Doha, Qatar. 

My postal address is : C/o Qatar Airways, 8th Floor, Tower Block. Doha. P.O. Box 22550 

I'm attaching a short bio with this mail. 

I hope you will enjoy reading 'A lie'. 

Regards 

Arti  Jain +974 3360 1205 <+974%203360%201205> 