From: Jekwu Anyaegbuna <correnz@yahoo.com>
Date: 30 March 2018 at 19:30
Subject: submission
To: "outofprintmagazine@gmail.com" <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>

*BRIEF BIO:* 

*Jekwu Anyaegbuna* is a Nigerian writer. He won the 2012 Commonwealth Short Story Prize for Africa. He won the 2015 fiction fellowship of the Elizabeth Kostova Foundation for Creative Writing in Bulgaria. He was shortlisted for the Miles Morland Foundation’s 2016 Morland Writing Scholarship. Novelist Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie selected him to participate in the Farafina Trust Creative Writing Workshop. His fiction and poetry have been widely published in many reputable British and American literary journals, including *Granta*, *American Chordata*, *Transition*, *Ambit*, *Magma*, *Orbis*, *The Massachusetts Review*, *The Lampeter Review*, *Eclectica*, and *Yuan Yang*, among others. You can follow him on Twitter: @JekwuAnyaegbuna. 

*THE STORY:* 

*THE PORTRAIT* 

*By Jekwu Anyaegbuna* 

Mommy, my Jesus-addicted Mommy, came back from church, carrying a massive framed portrait of Pastor Paul. His black suit glistened through the glass cage. She lowered it on the dining table with a blissful expression on her face, the sitting room too hot for relaxation. After my Big Sister Akudinobi and I welcomed her home, I became totally bowled over by what Mommy intended doing in our house with the glossy image of her pastor. I was certain she must have paid a huge sum for it. Nothing was ever free with Pastor Paul. I wondered if she was she going to pray to him as an idol. Akudinobi paced to the table, lifted the portrait, and stared at it for a long time, raising and dropping her shoulders. Mommy crumpled her face, watching her closely, because she knew that her anti-Jesus daughter would condemn the portrait. Akudinobi dumped it back on the table and returned to the sofa, without saying anything. 

“Ebubedike.” 

“Mommy.” 

“I think your father has a hammer and nails in this house.” 

“Yes, Mommy. They’re in his bedroom.” 

“Go and get them for me.” 

Inside the bedroom, Daddy was asleep, even snoring. I bent down and pulled out the toolbox from under the bed. I brought out the hammer, picked up a concrete nail, and pushed the box in. It whooshed back to its former place. I worried that the noise might jolt Daddy awake, but it didn’t. When I returned to the sitting room, Akudinobi was busy cracking her knuckles, and Mommy still stood where she had been, murmuring a gospel song. *Jesus, My Heavenly Robot.* She dragged our plastic chair to the wall and asked me to come forward with the nail and hammer. 

“Climb on top of this chair. Hammer the nail into the wall,” she told me. “Ensure you stretch up your hands so as to nail it at the topmost part of the wall.” 

Akudinobi frowned, always against Mommy’s religiosity. 

“Now?” I asked. 

Mommy looked daggers at me. “Please do what I’ve told you.” 

She held the chair as I climbed. The four legs were shaking, but I managed to stand and succeed with the task. The wall was soft, hungry for fresh cement and paint. Crumbles of old cement fell down as I pounded the nail in. Mommy flew to the table and hauled the portrait with her two hands, cuddling it like a precious baby. She wheeled around, extended the portrait to me, and said, “Hang Pastor Paul on the wall.” 

“No, Mommy. I don’t want to be a murderer. Why should I hang him?” 

“I mean you should hang his portrait.” 

“Okay, Mommy.” 

When she handed me the photo and I hanged it up, I felt as though Pastor Paul would leap out and give my sister a big blow for frowning at him.  I jumped down and glanced at Pastor Paul. He was smiling down at me, at us. 

Mommy grinned at the portrait. “My Papa,” she burst out. “I love you.” 

Akudinobi clapped her hands twice in scorn. “I knew this was going to happen. I knew it. Pentecostal pastors are fraudsters.” 

“My Papa,” Mommy said again, still looking at the wall, ignoring her daughter. “Isn’t he handsome?” 

“He must be smelling, with all his skin decay from bleaching,” Akudinobi said, and laughed. “Mommy, has he replaced your Jesus Christ?” 

Mommy turned around. “Akudinobi, stop condemning The Man of God. You stand the risk of developing tooth decay from doing so. The presence of this portrait is the solution to all our problems in this family.” 

“Mommy, I recently started using Colgate to brush my teeth,” Akudinobi said, smiling. “It’s more powerful than Pastor Paul and his impotent curses.” 

“Mommy, will the portrait force the government to pay your salary every month?” I asked. 

“Yes, my son. With the portrait, all things are possible,” she enthused. “Do you know that this portrait cured a woman of epilepsy, just by looking at it.” 

“Christianity is a scam,” Akudinobi said. 

Mommy went dumb and sat down beside her daughter, glowering at her. Akudinobi looked fixedly at the portrait, maybe searching for another flaw to point out. As I made to return the hammer, Daddy was coming into the sitting room, through the hallway. He had recently converted to Islam. He stretched himself, yawning. He was wearing black trousers. Although he was shirtless, a white towel hung over his neck, perhaps for drying his sweat. I guessed he wanted to have a bath. I would not know at the moment. Immediately his eyes fell on the portrait, he stood still. He rubbed his hands across his face, maybe to clear the cobweb of bewilderment from his eyes, and glanced at Pastor Paul again. Daddy showed a displeased expression, wrinkling his brows. 

“What’s the meaning of this, Regina?” he asked his wife, pointing at the portrait. 

Mommy smiled. “My Papa.” 

“Your Papa?” 

“Yes, Timothy. Isn’t he adorable?” 

“Your father died many years ago, Regina, even before I married you. So what are you saying?” 

“The presence of this portrait will bring you the promotion you’ve been seeking in your office for months.” 

“Don’t be stupid, Regina!” 

He rushed to the wall and raised his hands. His underarms bore no hair. He did not have to climb the chair to collect the portrait. His height always made everything possible. He held the aluminium frame and pulled it out of the wall. He seemed to have gathered the strength of a boxer for a moment. And then he smashed the portrait right there on the sitting room floor with a shattering sound that made me drop the hammer and close my ears. Many broken pieces ran under the sofa, under the dining table, some of them into the hallway. Mommy shrank, bundling up herself into her arms, shivering. Daddy doubled over, grabbed the paper on which Pastor Paul was drawn, and tore it to pieces. Akudinobi broke into laughter. Mommy burst into tears and stood up. Picking up the hammer, my hand started trembling. 

“Timothy, you’ve broken God, and you’ve torn God,” Mommy sobbed out. “I am sure you know the punishment. Everlasting perdition, you know that.” 

“Nonsense.” 

“The Bible says touch not my anointed and do my prophet no harm,” Mommy cried, wiping her nose with a handkerchief. 

“Balderdash.” 

Akudinobi stopped laughing and yelled, “Daddy, it appears Pastor Paul has told his followers to regard him as their God now and ignore Jesus Christ.” 

“I can’t place a finger on the reason for this stupidity,” Daddy said. “My daughter, please sweep these things off and throw them away.” 

As she stood up, Daddy turned to me and said, “Ebubedike, you’re now the house carpenter. *Okwia*? Please return my hammer and get me a bucket of water. I want to have a bath.” Mommy carried her Bible and turned towards her bedroom, weeping and shivering. 

The next day, Daddy decided to take me to an Arabic-learning class for children, a sultry Tuesday evening, around five. The class was in the premises of Ansarul-Deen Mosque within the police barracks where we lived, so both of us got there after three minutes of trekking, holding hands. 

“You must always come here every evening,” Daddy said, as we stood outside the building. “I am going to introduce you to the man in charge of the teaching. He’s an alfa. Alfa Idris. A nice man. You will like to learn from him.” 

“What’s he going to teach me?” I asked. 

“How to read and write our religion.” 

“I already know that, Daddy,” I said and spelled I-S-L-A-M, counting my fingers. 

“That’s not what I mean. Reading and writing Islam must mandate you to read and write Arabic. That’s the official language of the Muslim world, and that’s what you’ve come here to imbibe.” 

I nodded. “All right.” 

He asked me to wait for a while as he went inside to call the teacher. When they both came out, to my surprise, the teacher appeared young, neat, and beardless. He was almost as tall as Daddy, but his skin was the darker shade of exhaust fumes. I had expected to see an old, shabby man with his beards and goatee flailing like pine leaves. He was wearing a white jellabiya. I bowed, greeting him, and he rubbed my head. 

“Alfa Idris, this is my only son. I spoke to you about him last week,” Daddy said. “I’ve brought him here for you to commence training him in the rudiments of our religion.” 

The man smiled. “But I am not an alfa,” he said. “I am a muhallim, an Islamic teacher. So call me Muhallim Idris.” 

“Oh, I am very sorry about that,” Daddy said. 

“What’s your son’s name?” Muhallim Idris asked. 

“Ebubedike,” Daddy said. “But his Islamic name is Yusuf.” 

Muhallim made a face. “Who gave him the Islamic name? You?” 

“No,” Daddy said. “The chief imam of Ilorin Central Mosque did, some months ago.” 

Muhallim smiled again. “Perfect, I can now accept it,” he said, nodding several times, as he jotted down the name. He did not bother to ask about my family surname, Okoro. Would there not be several other children in his class bearing Yusuf? 

I frowned, looked up at them, and said, “I don’t want that Islamic name. I don’t like it. My name is Ebubedike Okoro.” 

“It’s been signed and sealed, my son,” Daddy said. “You must bear the Islamic name.” 

Daddy handed me over to the man and left. Muhallim took me inside the class filled with children my age. He asked me to sit at the back because there was no vacant chair in the front. He transferred to me a copy of *Qāidat Bagdadiyat*—Rules of the People of Bagdadiyat—a book for beginners in Arabic. He also passed a wooden slate and a piece of white chalk across to me, as well as a wrap of biscuits. When he turned around and faced the black board to write, I felt I should pelt his football-shaped head with huge stones and broken bottles. For some seconds, I imagined that this handsome man might have been abusing these children sexually. Such stories had been in the news regularly of late, but I dismissed the thought. 

When he faced the class again, he said he had to recap his previous lessons for the sake of the newcomer. He introduced me to the Arabic alphabet. It was easy. Within some minutes, I could correctly identify and write some letters, from right to left, on my slate. I was doing well, better than those children who had been long there before me. Muhallim became proud of me, after inspecting my work, and appointed me as the class captain. 

He looked outside suddenly and departed. When he returned, he said my mother wanted to see me. My heart sank, my head spinning. How did Mommy know I was here? She was not home when Daddy and I had left. 

Mommy looked shell-shocked when I came out to meet her. “What are you doing here?” she asked, her eyelids trembling in disappointment. 

“Daddy wants my knowledge of Islam to blossom,” I said. 

“Why is your hand so white?” 

“I’ve been writing Arabic with white chalk.” 

Muhallim Idris was at the door, watching both of us. 

She stared at me for some seconds. “My son, you will never become a Muslim. I soak you with the blood of Jesus Christ,” she burst out. “Your position in heaven is assured.” 

Mommy always wanted me to go to heaven but she did not want me to die early. Never. I used to wonder how else anyone would get to heaven if not through the alleyways of coffin and grave. She now stared at the sky, perhaps searching for Jesus Christ to complain to. Only a dove was fluttering across the clouds. She grabbed my hand and started to drag me home, muttering and quoting all the devil-killing verses in the Bible, as we both took long strides on the sandy path. 

The sitting room was warm, as usual. Akudinobi sat on the sofa, reading *How Europe Underdeveloped Africa,* almost nearing the end of the book. She stuck a red bookmark into the book, placed it beside her, and glared at us. Daddy was not home but I noticed he had hung a framed portrait of a hugely white-bearded Islamic scholar from Turkey at the spot on the wall where Pastor Paul’s portrait had been. The Turk’s long Arabic name was unpronounceable but it started with the short title of Sheikh. His goatee cascaded down his chest. His image was imposed on a background showing a gigantic mosque and the stone of Kabba with millions of pilgrims rotating around it. Arabic lettering was scrawled in an elegant font at the base of the photo. A crescent and a star were drawn at the top-left corner. 

“Mommy, I didn’t expect you to go to the mosque and puncture the young boy’s lesson,” Akudinobi said. “I shouldn’t have told you where he had gone.” 

Mommy was speechless, gazing up at Sheikh, holding her lower jaw with her right hand. Her pensiveness burnt me like a fire. 

“Mommy!” Akudinobi screamed. 

Mommy jolted back to life and faced her daughter. “Akudinobi, what was your father thinking when he hung this godless photograph here?” Mommy asked, pointing back at the wall with her thumbs. 

“I think you should wait until he returns,” Akudinobi said. “Only he should have the answer.” 

“I can’t wait,” Mommy said, scuttling towards the portrait. She drew a plastic chair and stood on it with one leg, stretching upwards to grab the picture frame. She jumped down with it. 

“When next I travel to our village, I will bring the bronze mask of my Amadioha deity and hang it there,” Akudinobi said. “And nobody will dare to remove it.” 

Mommy shut her eyes in scorn and opened them again. “Devil’s advocate! Do whatever pleases you. I’ve already written you off the register of heaven.” 

Akudinobi giggled. “Mommy, there’s nothing like heaven. It’s a very smart stunt orchestrated by white people to keep black people in the perpetual bondage of underdevelopment. White people are aware that black people are pliable and cannot think for themselves.” She was still smiling. “When I die, I will go to the land of my ancestors, still here on earth, but in the world of the spirits.” 

Mommy said nothing further. She had learnt that arguing with Akudinobi was fruitless, and her riposte was downright confrontational. 

Mommy handed me the portrait, asked me to go downstairs with it, and wait in the backyard. “I am coming down with a bucket of holy water to detoxify your body and soul. I don’t want to wash you in our bathroom because I wouldn’t want it contaminated with the garbage and poison of Islam. How could you eat those Islamic biscuits?” Akudinobi creased her face, rolled her eyes, and picked up her book again, hauling her legs onto the sofa. 

Downstairs, Mommy broke the portrait into pieces, cursing the Sheikh, saying he was going to perish in a suicide bombing. She gathered the ruins and flung them into the bush with a force that almost tore her white blouse at the underarms. She then stripped me stark naked and tossed my shirt and trousers out. They both flapped in the air and crumpled on a dense of African violets growing in the backyard. 

She started washing me with a local sponge and the holy water in a white bucket, droning on about the fear of God and decency. She whirred nimbly about sin and redemption and wisdom and knowledge and eternity and counsel and righteousness and understanding and fortitude and piety. For almost five minutes, my body tingled all over as she scrubbed hard. I was ashamed of myself, afraid that my friends might see my nakedness and make jest of me afterwards. I curdled my ten-year-old penis in my hands as the salty water fell from head to toe. She cupped her hand, scooped some water, and dispatched it to my mouth. 

“I must cleanse your insides and neutralise the biscuits,” she snapped, the water leaking into the bucket through her fingers. “Open your mouth now.” 

“No, Mommy,” I shouted, with a high shrug. 

She smacked my buttocks with her left hand, and my mouth suddenly parted. I gurgled down the water. She scooped again, and I drank it without any complaint. 

“You are clean now, my son,” she declared, with authority. “But that’s not enough. I am going to enrol you in the children’s service at Living Winners Tabernacle. You must go to heaven through the mercies of Jesus Christ and the machinery of Pastor Paul. Do you hear me?” 

“Yes, Mommy.” 

She grabbed my wears and flung them back to me, asking me put them on quickly. My nerves pickled, my stomach burning. My eyes turned, and my brain churned. I felt giddy, felt the rush of air in and out as my lungs inflated and deflated. Any moment from now I might consider suicide. 

Dinner that night did not go well with us because Daddy was furious about the broken portrait of Sheikh. The meals were on the dining table but nobody got near it, not yet. 

“Regina, how many times have I told you that this house belongs to me?” Daddy shouted, standing in the hallway. “The chief imam gave me that portrait. It was imported, very expensive and precious to behold.” 

I was sure he became proud of the portrait just because it was imported. If it had been produced in our dull city of Ilorin, he would not have bothered himself. Mommy’s younger sister, Auntie Chinelo, had once bought him a T-shirt from Switzerland, and he worshiped the gleaming shirt like a god. He wore it only on special occasions. 

Mommy stood in front of her bedroom door and banged on it. “Timothy, if I am the mother of your children, then the house also belongs to me. After all, my sister Chinelo has been paying the rent. Are you not ashamed of yourself? *Ifere mee gi.* Shame on you, Timothy.” 

Akudinobi and I stood together, watching them. 

“Hanging that portrait in this sitting room demonstrates that I am a proud Muslim. And the chief imam has been working on my promotion in the police force.” 

“If my pastor’s portrait can’t hang there, then yours can’t hang, either.” 

Daddy stormed down the hallway to beat her. She pushed her bedroom door open, ran inside, and slammed it shut. The bolt rattled behind as she locked it, struggling to protect herself. Akudinobi took my hand and drew me to the dining table. I didn’t eat, couldn’t eat. She took a bite of a fried potato and dropped the rest into the plate, munching the little in her mouth. Still enraged, Daddy growled into his bedroom and banged the door shut. 

*THE END* 