From: Michelle D'costa <pikoomish@gmail.com>
Date: 10 June 2018 at 12:11
Subject: Re: Submission
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>

*The case of the missing breast* 

My phone rings. I don’t recognise the number. I am with Shalini at Matteo’s. I ignore the call. Probably some sales person. I am looking at the girl seated on the opposite couch, I recognise her as Alice, my school mate. 

‘See, how shameless she has become. I know her from Bahrain. Her parents are very strict. She had no boyfriends in school and now she roams openly.’ I stare at Alice, sipping my Cappucino. Shalini looks behind her. ‘Hey appear casual. Don’t stare.’ I whisper loudly. 

‘Whatever, what’s wrong in it? Are you still hung up on that guy?’ 

‘What? Which guy?’ I feign ignorance. 

‘Come on. Ric, who else? It’s been two years. You haven’t spoken about any guy, really. How is he? Are you in touch with him?’ 

‘Ric!’ I laugh. ‘I‘ve stopped thinking about him. He hasn’t called since I left. I heard that he didn’t return. Probably doing some business there.’ 

‘What business could he do in Manipur? No, sorry, Mizoram, right?’ 

‘I don’t know, okay? Mizoram, yes. No one tells me anything anymore and I don’t care, really.’ 

‘So, are your parents still looking? They wanted you to quit and go to Bahrain, right?’ 

‘That was long back. I told them to stop bothering me. There’s no privacy there re. Everyone knows everyone. I’m happy here.’ 

‘Are you, really? You don’t look happy. See, maybe it’s for the best it never worked out with him, you know. All these inter-state stuff looks exotic but just imagine, Mangy with a Chinki.’ 

‘Don’t call him that!’ I say, fuming, wondering if I should tell her how her relationship would never work out because her guy is Catholic. 

‘Whoa. Sorry, I just...’ 

I take a deep breath and tell myself to calm down. Shalini is a friend. He hasn’t contacted you in two years. Calm down. I look away from Shalini to see that Alice has left. I’m disappointed. I wonder where she has gone. The guy with her had looked handsome. The waitress arrives with the bill. Shalini picks her wallet, I stop her, ‘This is on me. We are meeting after a very long time.’ Shalini and I depart outside Matteo’s. 

‘You sure you can’t wait longer? Maybe we could play air hockey at Amoeba’s like last time. Just one game. I still have my card from the last time we visited. Don’t know if it has an expiry date though.’ I look for the card in my purse. ‘No yaar. I’m sure. I have to meet Derek. He’s leaving today no.’ She smiles apologetically. I say, ‘I understand.’ But I don’t. How the fuck can I? I’m 30 and single. How will I understand? She has to take the metro, she says, I escort her to the entrance of the metro and then head back to the lane. I want to visit Blossoms, opposite Amoeba. What will I do there? The thought of browsing books while Alice and Shalini have better things to do makes me turn and hail a rickshaw. 

I open Facebook and stalk Alice. She has posted so many photos with the guy. His name is Art. Who the heck is named Art? My phone rings again. This time I answer. ‘Hello?’ 

Silence. ‘Hello?’ 

‘Hi Meg. Ric here, I’m in Bangalore.’ 

‘Sorry?’ My heart skips a beat, I have heard him well, but I keep saying, ‘Hello? Hello?’ and cut the call. The rickshaw stops by the signal. My mind is all over the place. What is he doing here? Should I meet him? 

I meet him at his small apartment in Koramangala. He says he has enough money to keep him going for a few months without a job. I don’t ask how. I don’t want anything to jinx this. It is nice to have him back. He looks good. Rugged, with his facial hair. A little tired but not bad. Maybe he is fine now. We don’t talk about what happened after I left. We sit on his couch. I start to get ideas when he brings a file over to me. ‘Will you help me? I need to solve a case.’ 

‘The case of the missing breast’ the file says. I am intrigued and immediately remember why I had left. I gather courage and ask him, ‘Does this have anything to do with your friend who was suffering from breast cancer?’ He looks at me. ‘Will you help me solve the case?’ He had been a devout Catholic before, even when he had heard about his friend. Was his belief still intact? 

Before I know it, I’m getting pigeons into his house. Helping him push the birds into the bathroom. ‘These pigeons remind me of Bahrain. They are everywhere. On buildings, roads, everywhere except trees. Kind people leave water and grains for them on the footpaths.’ I say, trying to make sense of what I’m doing. He had been looking at photos and videos of pigeons, trying to analyse the way they moved, for over a week. ‘How is this related to the case?’ I had asked. 

‘You will know, first hand.’ 

He thanks me for getting the birds and before I can say, Anytime, he starts attacking the birds with a knife.  I am too shocked to scream. I’m thinking of the time a pigeon got trapped in our balcony grill. Its struggle put me to tears then. Dad had set it free but it couldn’t go far as it was badly injured. It limped away and fell. I didn’t sleep well for days. Ric looks at me and says, ‘Now you know why I wanted to see how they moved. Still, I missed so many times. I stabbed myself twice. It doesn’t make sense, right? Nothing does. No matter how much you prepare. Least of all, cancer. Yes, she ate all the delicacies like pig testicles and what not. But who doesn’t there? Who doesn’t? Does everyone get cancer? No! What? Why are you crying? I know they have pigeon soup there in Bahrain. Don’t pretend this is violent. Please. Now help me clean up, will you? I thought something random will help. The way God picked her.’ 

I don’t tell Shalini that I have met Ric and that I stay over at his place. It is too early to say anything. She might stop me. I’m lying on his bed trying to recreate the memory of the last time we were together in Mizoram. He had convinced me to visit his place. His mother had offered me dog soup as I was her ‘most special’ guest. I did not want to have it, but I was afraid if I refused he would never let me out of the friend zone. I had it despite his protest. 

That night, as we lay on his bed, his hands rested on his stomach. I was aching for him. I wanted to lift his hands and place them on my breasts. What if he hated me for it? He received a call. One of his female friends was in the hospital. Her left breast removed. I left Mizoram soon, when I realised he wasn’t himself anymore. The one reason we had bonded was because of our mutual faith in Christ. We had met in church and when I saw that wane, I knew I had to leave. He hadn’t told me about this friend before and I thought he had more baggage than I had guessed. His depression was too much to handle. I hope the time we have spent apart has helped him heal. 

He slowly opens the door. I sit up on the bed blinking away tears. I can hear soft yelping. My eyes widen at the sight of the dog. I slip off the bed and hug the dog. ‘Don’t get too attached, okay. We are having that for dinner.’ I help him slaughter the dog. He silences my fear reminding me of all the dog torture stories from Bahrain I had confided in him. ‘We aren’t hurting the dog like those assholes do, right? They burn them, yeah? All we are doing is eating it. Don’t you eat pork? Pig slaughters! The way your cousins fatten them and then kill them mercilessly, from your vacation in Mangalore, remember? *That* is sinister. All we are doing is trying to find the answer. Why are you behaving like this is so weird? Haven’t you seen worse slaughters? Bakrid? It’s not like you are a vegetarian. You can’t love animals* and* eat them.’ 

I chew the dog meat and swallow, thinking it is chicken, the way I did at his home. ‘Listen. The night I received the call. You were the only one there with me. You and I both had dog soup that day. I told you not to have. As such food causes cancer. We will find the answer. We will. Only you can help me solve this case. We are on the right track, see?’ 

We are at the restaurant on the boulevard below the metro line. I can see the reflection of the metro in the windows on the building opposite the boulevard. Ric is focusing on his idlis. I’m staring at him, watching him eat. I look to my right. Alice and Art are walking, hand in hand. I think of the alliteration of their names. She is looking sideways, at Art. She notices me. I hope she has seen Ric too. Yes, I have someone too. I think it is time I tell Shalini about him. She might be happy for me. We reach home, we haven’t become intimate yet. I’m hoping the days and nights I have spent with him trying to solve the case will make him see me more than a friend. 

He has taken off his shoes. He settles down with his file. I take the file from his hand and sit beside him. I play with his hair and kiss him softly. At first, he goes stiff. I caress his face. My hands going lower. I find his hand and guide them to my breast. That’s when his hand becomes alive and he presses it saying, ‘I have been looking everywhere when the answer was here itself.’ 

​ 

* * * 

*Bio:* An Indian, born (1991) and raised in Bahrain, Michelle D’costa has short fiction/ poetry published in Coldnoon, The Madras Mag, Antiserious, The Bombay Literary Magazine and many others. You will find author interviews on her blog: https://michellewendydcosta.wordpress.com/ 

Michelle D'costa c/o Lavina Fernandes 

Julian Chawl, behind Marian villa, 

station road, Vikhroli (West) 

Mumbai- 400079 

Mob. No.: 8898352842 

​ 