From: sheena dlima <sheenadlima@gmail.com>
Date: 14 June 2018 at 12:22
Subject: SUBMISSION
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

*Biographical Sketch*: Sheena D’Lima is an amateur fiction writer who lives and works out of Pune. She has written non-fiction for digital imprints like Deep Dives: Sexing the interwebs <https://deepdives.in/what-schoolgirls-in-india-can-teach-us-about-social-media-9d9e61c45f55>and has been a freelance as well as full time journalist for publications like Time Out Pune, Better Interiors and Hindustan Times Brunch. She currently works with the Krantijyoti Savitribai Phule Women’s Studies Centre in Pune on exciting research projects that marry gender, caste, access and social location in Indian Higher Education. She has also conducted  workshops on Gender sensitivity, the declining child sex ratio and Women’s safety in Public spaces with undergraduate students both as part of the KSP Women’s Studies Centre and independently. In her free time, she reads like it’s going out of style and does jigsaw puzzles. 

*By the sea* 

Mr. Peter Noronha settled into the big chair in his grandsons rented room on Trinity Street, balanced his plate of brun and butter on his knee and got right to the heart of the matter. 

“Sean,” he said, “I’ve come to ask you quite plainly. Why you have stopped coming to Mass? It has been about two months now and we haven’t seen you anywhere near the Parish. Now you are a young man, not a boy, so I’m not here to tell you what to do. But I want to understand why you’ve turned your back on your community.” 

Sean who had just brought in two steaming mugs of tea, smiled easily, though his heart sank with nervousness. It was one of the many big conversations he’d been having with his family for about a year.  He hoisted himself up on the broad window sill that looked out into the paved lane off the main road and raised the cup to his lips. 

“Well to be honest with you, Grandpa. I don’t feel like going to a place where I feel judged for who I am.” 

“Pooh. That’s surely all in your head. Except for our family, nobody at Church, even knows that you came out. As far as I am concerned, who you love is none of my business… But to be a part of a community, to worship with your brothers and sisters, this is something that not only makes us who we are, it gives us meaning.” 

“It gives me no meaning. You know what passages get invoked when Christians talk about being gay. They bring up Sodom and Gomorrah. They view queerness and gay people as  monstrosities and deviants, aberrations against God.” 

“You’re painting with rather a broad brush. We don’t view you as an aberration. Your family, who know you and have accepted your sexuality, know you and love you. And the scriptures have many passages that talk of love, acceptance and forgiveness. Have you forgotten?” 

“Forgiveness,” said Sean with a bitter laugh, “What have I done to be forgiven for? It’s this condescending attitude that brings back all the loneliness and self-blame I felt when I was younger and realised that I was not like anyone else. Last month, Mama insisted I go for confession…Ok she actually bribed me, so off I went…” 

“What, really?” asked Mr Noronha. “Who did you confess to?” 

“Father Vincent. Mama must have spoken with him first because he knew that I’d stopped coming to mass. He did that thing that priests do when they know they are talking to a young person. He said that I needn’t go the confessional and we could just have a normal chat in the garden. So I went on a Sunday just before lunch and we both sat down in the garden. When he asked me what was burdening me, I told him everything.” 

“Oh my goodness,” said Mr Noronha, “Did he hit the roof?” 

“No, he seemed to be treading very carefully. He said that my queerness was no reason for me to end my relationship with God.” 

“Good man!” cheered his grandfather. 

“Then he talked a little bit about how he had seen me when I was a small boy and had watched me grow up. He said that he knew my family and how much we loved God….It seemed that all was going well. And then probably because I was quiet and listening to him, he said, “You know, God loves the sinner, not the sin.” And I knew then that no matter how friendly he was being, he still viewed my sexuality as a sin.” 

The room was quiet for a minute. 

“You know,” said Mr Peter Noronha gently, “he probably only meant that we are all sinners. I know Fr Vincent from when he had just received his orders. He was young then and very progressive. He wasn’t judging you, I’m sure.” 

Sean looked out of the window and took a long sip from his mug. The windows of the cheap two-table bar opposite his window were dark and desolate. All the drunks from last night had been shooed off home by the manager Shinde, who was now putting out last night’s garbage. Sean watched the scene idly, his mind replaying a memory. The placid stone Virgin Mary presiding over a rock grotto was in front of him, behind Fr Vincent’s bespectacled friendly face. Sean had gone off on one of his politically charged rants. He brought up Human Rights, section 377 and how damaging it was that religious institutions made homophobia legitimate. “I want no part in such a community, “ he had raged. He saw something in his listeners face – a profound sorrow - that almost made him take his words back. Instead he turned his back on the priest who had given him his First Holy Communion and played football with him and the boys every Saturday. He strode out of the rust coloured gate into the dusty street feeling something in his heart tighten and knot up. What other parts of himself, he had wondered, would he have to grieve the loss of, to be the part of himself that felt truest? 

They were at Marine Drive now. Mr Noronha had said his room was too stuffy for words. “You’re a townie fellow now, so you lead the way to the ice cream chap,” the old man had said.  The day was warming up. Soon it would be too hot to sit on the stone that faced the water, but the ice cream right after breakfast tasted like a summer holiday. 

“Why is it so important to you that I go to church?” asked Sean 

“I’ve seen a lot happen in this city. There used to be days when nobody had your back except your community. And those days are coming again. You know, we are a minority in this country and we are being made aware of it every single day. If tomorrow something happens, if there is a riot, who will come and help you? Where will you sleep if a mob burns down your house? At the house of your Hindu friends? Who will stand by you and protect you?” 

“Oh Grandpa. Come now. The notions of communities have changed. I have communities that are non-religious.” 

“Do you really feel a sense of community at your….” He searched for the word, “ meetings?” 

“I do. The meetings I go to are political meetings, but not in the sense we understand. We spend a lot of time reading different books from queer activists and writers, we share experiences. If we can’t meet, we interact online. We try to educate ourselves and see our multiple realities. I’ve made friends that are so different from me you know, who have lead very different lives. But I still feel like a brother to them. Dalit Queer activists, writers, trans-women. I would never have formed some of these friendships if I had not come out. They give me hope and strength.” 

“Hope and strength,” said his grandfather, thoughtfully polishing off his wafer cone. “I can understand that. That’s how I feel about going to mass and also being a part of all our Church feasts.” 

After lunch at an Irani café, just near the Marine Lines station Sean suggested that they walk alongside the tracks and then take the overhead bridge that lead back toward the rented room in Trinity Street. 

“Senior citizens need an afternoon nap,” he said playfully and his grandfather cuffed him playfully on the shoulder. It was an inside joke that Mr Noronha fancied himself very young and dashing, Bandra’s Clint Eastwood, despite the thinning grey hair and the Srinagar wood walking cane. 

“I’m not tired but I’ve had enough of town. It’s too formal and old fashioned, with its big grey colonial Buildings and wide streets. Let’s take the train to Bandra. They have chess tables built on Carter Road now.” He paused. “I want to sit by the sea and talk to you. The sea inspires confidences.” 

Sean was in his first year and had moved out of his mother’s home to stay closer to college. He told his grandfather about what he was learning and which teachers he liked and the friends he had made. The promenade was deserted except for the couples down at the edge of the water, their backs to the cruel world. Mr Noronha was starting to feel very warm despite the fresh salt and fish scented breeze that cooled the damp skin behind his collar. As they walked, him listening to Sean, he felt grateful about how well he got along with his grandson, despite the difference in generation. Every time they met, the two fell into the easy conversation of very fast friends. It had always been like that, even when Sean was a little boy who used to tell his grandfather that Dravid was far more reliable than Sachin especially when India was batting first. As a small boy, Sean was lively, mischievous and curious; darting out of the house to catch a squirrel; playing tricks on his older cousins, climbing the trees in the garden. When Sean had “come out of the closet” as they say these days, it did not even occur to Mr Noronha to think of his tall lanky grandson as any different. He was still Sean. Yes, owing to the families position and reputation in the Parish, no one could overtly mention that they had a grandson who was  …well, you know. But they were a progressive family, a liberal family…Sean could have had it much worse. 

“Sean, when you told us that you didn’t like girls, was there something wrong with the way we took it? Or the way I took it? I saw it as your business and I loved you just the same. I never saw you as a disappointment, the way some other people might.” 

“Not a disappointment, but I did feel like there was a shift in the way you, I should say the family, viewed me. It was as though, I could be loved and accepted in some private spaces, but that in other spaces I was an uncomfortable secret. I know Mama has probably told her artist friends that I have come out. But for her, there’s a social currency in accepting her gay son in that circle. Her friends give her like a stupid progressive badge of honour. But yet, she purposely avoids the subject in front of her church friends. You know how hard that time was when I was in a relationship with Nikunj… Do you remember how she said, “I accepted you, but you don’t have to flaunt it.” It irritates her to see some parts and sides of me that she’d rather not see. I see that as violence. It would have been better to kick me out of the house than to say, “I accept you, but please go back to acting the way you acted before.” 

“I was just thinking myself very generous in accepting you, Sean,” said the old man, speaking almost to the sea. “Now I see, I have been using that word “acceptance” as armour to shield myself from the other kinds of harm that I have been doing.” 

“There’s another angle. I’m still young. I may have come out, but I am still discovering for myself what I like and what I don’t. Even straight people don’t all have sex the same way. People like different things. Desire is so vast, like the sea, and it is always changing. I would like the space to discover  that as you did, as others did, with dignity.” 

“I never thought about it like that,” said Mr Peter Noronha, “ To discover the ways in which you can desire with dignity. It almost makes me feel like straight people also can be pressured into feeling only one kind of desire. But that surely can’t be true.” 

“No, no. It is.” said Sean, excitedly, “Think about this. Our church teachings only favour reproductive sex as legitimate. The priest that conducts the catholic marriage preparation courses says it in so many words. I know this from when Anthony got married. Sex is only legitimate when it happens in a heteronormative Catholic marriage that brings Catholic babies. But what do those priests know? Desires are infinite and everyone knows this. Even people as straight as you. When you see this, you’ll see that sexuality is not just a gay issue. It’s EVERYBODY’S issue. Inter-caste couples, Inter-religion couples… everyone. Sex is being held hostage by heteronormativity” 

“Stop, stop. Do be quiet. Don’t use all these big words. I’m an old fashioned fellow,” cried the old man, ruffled and a little scandalized. “I must be the most ridiculous man in the world, talking about these intimate, sex related things with his grandson like a shameless fellow.” 

“No, no,” said Sean, “You’re the best, but really the only way you can restore your dignity is to buy me another ice cream. Let’s cross the road and come back here.” 

The evening brought the evening walkers, with their expensive foreign sneakers and purposeful strides, headphones shutting out weekend traffic, eyes fixed at a detached point in the distance. As the sun set, Mr Noronha confessed that he would soon have to get home and that Sean should come home for a nice fish dinner. 

“But Seany, listen to me. Before we go home, you must promise me that you will at least think about coming back to Mass. If you were not religious, I would not push you, but I know you still have faith. Not all of us Christians are here to stone you, for heaven’s sake. Churches are not made by walls, they are made of people. And people who love are capable of loving beyond measure, beyond what you call heteronormative rules. Think about it. As the hymn goes, “No man can live as an island, journeying through life alone.” Besides, how can you bring about any real kind of change, if you don’t include your institutions in the conversation about change?” 

His grandson was stumped by the clever mix of sentimentality and logic. Softened by the sea breeze, the day, the brightness of the older man’s eyes, he yielded. He said he’d think about it seriously. 

The pair left Carter road just as the last of the rosy light seeped out of the sky and into the sea. For a few minutes, it lingered like a gossamer veil over the vast moving water, before greying and finally disappearing. The water became dark, calm and heavy. A blanket over an exhausted earth. 

*The end* 