From: Sushant Dhar <dharsushants@gmail.com>
Date: 21 June 2018 at 19:16
Subject: Submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com
The Last Sermon 

Sushant Dhar 

She shouted his name. V came looking for us in the desolated ruins. He found none. He sat for a while and ran into the night. Asha came looking for him.  He entered the dark lane and walked towards the iron gate; unlocked it and went inside the abandoned house. He couldn’t find his old radio. He moved frantically from one room to the other. He slept for an hour in the room of his father. Half cut leg. Severed head of the goat. Burnt scalp. A pair of hooves and the mountains. The foreign song. Deskinned big hen on the nail of the door. Hanging livers in the bazaars of the old city. A hotel in ruins. Temple of the ancestors. The unsettling conversation between the old man and the young woman. The stories of home. Everything is at the same place. Nothing has moved. The dream I dreamt last night is the dream I dreamt when I was 5. He struggled in sleep. The tree was cut. The procession approached the abandoned house. The house was set ablaze.  He came out of the house at once, raised his right hand and was ready to deliver his first sermon. His mouth started to quiver and the sound from the chattering of his teeth pierced the ears of the congregation. Biting his lips, his gaze travelled to each one of his followers. The sermon had begun: ‘Be like that lonely tree standing upright in the graveyard. It works through all the days, takes up the food to the farthest of its branches and leaves. It grows and wilts and then comes back to life. It lives life at the precipice. It stands firm to the ruthless autumn, embraces it and perseveres for the spring. Be like this tree. Walk down the difficult path. Preserve your human dignity.’ ‘What do you saw in the dream? Did you saw the other world, the higher mortals? The uphill path? No. We saw a dark night, unyielding. The dot was shifting places. We watched from the balcony and saw night descending on everything. The stars seemed like shivering and drifting towards the ground. The moon vanished into the darkness. Many stars fell to their death and some survived. They landed on the houses and lamp posts of the streets. The dark street twinkled and appeared like the glowing sky. Trees grew sky high. A flash of lightening ran pass the dead sky. It started drizzling and then it snowed. We were filled with awe at the sight of snow falling from the dark sky and shining in the light of survived stars. Snow and stars. We didn’t sleep the entire night. We chased the stars. They kept on moving. We walked on the snow.’ The dream continues. He’s standing at the edge of the bridge and shouting at the city dwellers: ‘The snow is melting. The city will drown. The new temples will be buried in the silt and the old temples will rise from the ruins. Come one. Come all. Let us march together to the city of our forefathers. Pick your staff and raise the banner. The flame shouldn’t extinguish. Grandfather sits at the summit. He has risen from the dead. I saw a dream in a dream. I was awake the entire night. Clouds hovered around but it didn’t rain. Morning. Snow. I look ahead and I look back. Something resides inside him. A creature. Some voice. Another individual. He’s shouting from the cliff of the mountain. I hear somebody singing a song. Song of the Universe. I’m flying like a bird. I’m free. My hands are shivering. Tremors. I find no harmony in life. The song has fallen silent. Frightful silence has engulfed my entire being. The letters are falling apart. They’ve lost the symmetry. They are falling off the pages. The pages are stained. Lifeless. Dry. Pale. The sentence is drifting sideways. Coffee is ice-cold and has turned bitter. The priest has gone up for the pilgrimage. The never ending one. He will return at the end of the day. He’s moving towards the abyss, the ineluctable void. He’ll embrace it with sadness and joy. Freedom and Abandonment. Evening has fallen. It has stopped snowing. The wind has changed its course. How does the evening look like? I’ve forgotten everything. The color of evening. The shape of the sun. I’m trying to remember the ancient hymn chanted during the funerals; when the red fire burns the dry wood. The air outside is filled with cries; with embers of the funeral pyre. It’s getting dark. The sky is all painted black. Where are the stars and the half moon? How does one break the monotony of days and nights? I whispered a cry in the void to break the silence. I can’t hear any sound. Deafening silence. I’ve lost my voice. The priest is groaning. I can’t move my tongue. I run back to the prison. Where have they all gone? The inmates. Prisoners. Exiles. Which place they are travelling to? When did they leave? What about that old man who lived a century in the prison? Did he find closure? Did he survive the journey? It was his twentieth journey to a distant land. He didn’t finish his story. What happened next in the story? The old lady. Did she find her home? Her lost husband. He only remembers half of the events. Half moon. He did forget the place where he was born. He talked about his previous life. The village at the foot of the mountain. The lost river. The ancient river of the forefathers. The last battle of the Mughals. The British conquest. Has the priest been found? Is he dead?’ One day while walking past the old bridge; his eyes got fixed at the fish vendor sitting on the pavement of the bridge. One of the fishes in the container was alive and was fluttering its fins in vain. It was struggling to live. V crossed the road, walked towards the pavement and stood in front of the vendor. He asked for the one that was alive. The vendor stood aghast realizing that V was an ascetic and abhorred fish and meat. It shook him. His hands were trembling. The fish weighed 5kgs. V took hold of fish from the tail, handed five rupees to the vendor, a rupee more than the cost of the fish. V walked briskly towards the centre of the bridge and flung the big fish into the river Jhelum. The dream repeats itself. “It was cold. Not the usual cold of winters. Time was passing very fast. January, my 30th had arrived quickly. I am going slowly. There is mist in the air. It’s in my thoughts. I can’t feel my feet. It has started snowing. I come out of the prison. The mountains aren’t visible. I wrap myself in the quilt and take a walk around. Snow storm. Not a hint of life around. Desert. Everybody has left. The guard at the gate has slept. The gate is locked. I knock at the iron door. The guard is in deep sleep. He’s snoring like an animal. I knock at the door again. I repeat my action for hours. Not a movement inside. Sleep and death are synonymous. I’m gripped by intense cold. I can’t feel my left leg. It has more to do with the weariness that I carry in my heart and less to do with the cold. Tedium. Weariness. Cold. All three are assailing me. The torment inside has grown roots and has found places inside every corner of my consciousness. I run towards the prison. I sit in a corner. I look at the walls. I stand up and rush to the kitchen. The makeshift kitchen. A small bottle of coffee. Two packets of milk. A bag of rice and vegetables I bought from the vendor last week. He too left the place with others. I slept for two days and the morning/evening I woke up (I don’t remember the exact hour), I found myself surrounded by dreary silence. Frightening calm took hold of my entire being. I’m straining my skull and trying to recollect everything of the week I spent alone in that place. I poured a glass of milk in the steel mug. I made cold coffee. I’m holding a pen in my right hand and a mug of coffee in the other. As I write, I’m bending over the white paper, making a great futile effort to translate my life on the paper. My story. The story of prison and the half moon. The story of the saint who delivered his last sermon on the mountain top. The guard that never woke up. The people who never came back. The saint continued chanting. Buddha’s song. Some mantra. My heart is racing. The pulses. It’s loud. The revered saint of the village forgot the language. Native language. The language of his ancestors. He writes in an ancient script. He lost his speech. He’s making faces. Sacred nostalgia. Deep and broad. The unrequited love. Memory of home. The gun battle. Massacre. My heart is pounding. I’m finding it difficult to breathe. I’m awake. The moon has been cut into two. The old man drew his knife into it. Morning. I throw away the quilt, three of them. My eyes are closed. I open the door and come out. Prison is there. Prison is gone. The sun is shining bright. I open my eyes to the melting snow, icicles hanging from the rooftop. Winter. Stony silence. Not a soul on the road. I walk towards the main gate. The lock is still intact. I peep through the window of the guard room. He’s still sleeping. I make certain sounds at the door. I shout at the gate keeper. Not a movement. Everything is in the same position as it was yesterday. All the doors are locked. The highway is deserted. No sound of moving trucks. I can’t climb the wall. The wall is sky high. There’s a small hole in the wall. I see the outside world through it. I sense everything that happens around me; the slightest of the movement, the blinking of one’s eye, every word of the conversation I had the entire day. My mind never rests. It gazes around everywhere, walks past the scenic landscape into the arid desert, stretches itself wide, at the oasis, looking straight into the blazing ball of light. The gate is still locked. I return to my room. The prison. The gatekeeper woke up. He started shouting at me: “I’m being tormented by my own thoughts. They’ve taken hold of my mind. This is an uphill journey. Nothing comes easy. Sufferings, joy, struggle. I had my share. A current is passing through my left leg. A worm furrowing my muscles. I jump. I walk. It’s working. My body is devoid of energy. I suffer in silence. I live. I forget. I’ve set my eyes on the horizon. I’m trembling. My vision is blurred. There’s stench in the air. My body is burning like hot charcoal in the firepot. My hands are emitting sparks. A voice creaked through the brick wall. I was in deep sleep. I heard a human cry. A cry from a distant world. A woman’s cry. Somebody has died. Somebody left this wretched place. A woman’s wail. The prison. I wrestled with my own self. I have no lofty dreams and aspirations.  I live a simple and quiet life. My conscience never rests. It gave me a task; a task to construct a grand vision of life. I’m trying to imbibe the vision. The vision expands. The vision takes new heights. My heart expands and chases the goal. Mind too is ceaselessly mounting the ascent. I must sleep now. I have a duty. The vision. I’m going to work now. The sun is setting. Don’t knock the door. Let me work in peace.” The priest mumbled and went to his room. People marched towards the light. Some of the entries in the diary are illegible. Some are inscrutable. The date of his birth is marked on every page at the top. The family back home didn't publish an obituary in the local daily. There was no mourning. Mourning was forbidden. Nobody in the village attended the funeral. The body was taken to the crematorium in the evening. He lived a short life. The cause of his death was unknown. People say that he died of fever. Some say that he poisoned himself. V was found dead in the garden. His unfinished diary with daily notings was found right under the drawer of his table along with three loosely binded notebooks containing thousands of verses written in Urdu and Sanskrit. The last page of the diary mentioned two dates; 01.03.1925 - 14.6.1953. It was the coldest day of the year and the sun went into hiding for the entire day. V didn’t go to school. His father stood at the door listening to his son. V with his eyes closed, ‘The day isn’t ending today. It has lengthened its time and space. The watchman is sleeping under the sun. The guard is noting the entries on the daily book. I am looking at them through the iron grilled window. I am a prisoner in my own house. I have imprisoned my own self. My hands have stopped working. I can hardly work with my left hand. The evening walked afar into the distance. Night forgot to come. The drunkard is offering alms to the poor at the temple. He abuses them later. He confesses that he murdered the priest and ran to a foreign city. He guided his knife into the heart of the priest. Gods have no visitors now. Temple was locked by the people. I will die the death of a dog. People will see this. They will see the parade of my death. I will drink till my last breath. I am a sinner. I will be a saint in my next life. I am lifeless. I have a clot in my leg. It’s gangrene. It needs amputation. I can’t see. I am turning blind. I suffer from mouth spasms. G respects me. He bought me a bag of dry beans. They don’t understand. If I have committed any mistake, kill me. Hello son? Did you hear? They are out for the picnic. I am wandering outside. I am suffering from cervical spondylosis. I can’t move my neck. My nerves are inflamed. This is cancer, cancer of the soul.’ V fixed his gaze at the idol of the female goddess. The idol is on flame, he murmurs. The idol is on flame, he shouts. The temple priest rebuked him strongly. He chased V with a stick in his hands; threatening him to not come back to the temple. V disappears for a week. The annual hawan* preparations have started in the temple. Devotees from different villages are thronging the temple. The auspicious month of ‘Mal Maas*’is approaching. People from the entire continent will come to the sacred pond for performing the rites of their dead ancestors. They will offer wheat and rice to them. Devi will shower her blessings on the people of the village. V was scolded by the temple priest. Hawan was going on. Turmoil has set in his heart. He ran from the temple and didn’t talk to his parents for several days. He moved from one village to the other.  He came to the temple after a week and went straight to the priest and shouted at him: ‘You will not be able to perform hawan, offer food to God. There will be only snow. Winter will freeze your spine. People will turn back to their homes. Your temple will be buried in the snow. You will not be able to stand in front of God; he will not accept your offerings. Devi will find a new place. The mountain top.’ While throwing this all at the priest, tears were continuously flowing down from his eyes. His eyes were red and as he finished speaking, he fell at the feet of the idol. He stayed there for an hour, not moving, fixed, frozen like a dead. Priest was struck by all what V had said. He didn’t speak a word. He was furious but didn’t lay his hands on V. A shiver had run down his spine. It started snowing the very next week. Temple was buried under snow. Everybody had fled the village. The temple priest suffered from cold and couldn’t stand up for two weeks. He was afflicted with some disease that took hold of his spirit. Temple was left all deserted. All the priests ran for their life to the other village. Hawan* wasn’t performed in the temple. The temple was covered in snow, closed to the devotees. Nobody dared to enter. V was awake the entire night, invoking the goddess and chanting hymns. When he had finished praying, he ran straight to the compound of the temple and started dancing frantically for hours. He wept and cried while dancing. And the last sermon at the raised platform in the crematorium shook them all to their nerves. They stood aghast, embracing the truth and cried in silence. V emerged from the crowd and addressed them loud. The crowd settled down and all of them gazed at the priest intently. They looked dismayed. The priest whispered, 'Shame, Shame, Shame on us. V said looking at the burning pyre: 'The body is composed of five elements: water, fire, soil, sky and air. When we cease to live, all the elements return to their sources. Humans amount to nothing. The elements are immortal. Body is mortal. Take back the remains and immerse them into the river.  We are only bones and ashes; mere appendages of the Universe. Greed has covered our souls. Deceit drives us. We forgot our duty. We gave up to the temptations of flesh. We didn’t realize that we work for the master.  Realize your true self. You don't own anything. Praise the master. We are not the doers. We come and go. Time will swallow us all. The master lives. Praise the master and remember him every time. Come out from the dark well of ego. Hold a mirror onto yourself. Cast off the illusion.' Everyone woke up to snow in the month of June. V was awake the entire night watching from the window the entire valley draped under snow. He came out from the temple, crossed the bridge and went straight to Devika temple. Transfixing his mind and heart at the idol, he started chanting hymns till evening fell on the day. Nobody had come out from their houses. Winter had extended itself to the entire year. The chanting stopped. He sat in silence for two days. People assembled outside the temple the next morning. V came out. He had something to say. His voice was quavering. The sun had risen. V breathed his last beneath the tree. 

Glossary *Havan: ritual wherein offerings are made into a consecrated fire. *Samovar: a large metal container for tea. *Mal Maas: A month of religious significance for Hindus which comes after every 30 months. 

Bio Sushant Dhar lives in Jammu, India. His essays and short-fiction have been published in Outlook, New Asian Writing, The Bombay Review, Muse India, Indian Short Fiction Magazine and Indian Ruminations. The author can be contacted at dharsushants@gmail.com 
