From: TUSHAR G <tushar_g@hotmail.com>
Date: 25 June 2018 at 18:09
Subject: SUBMISSION
To: "outofprintmagazine@gmail.com" <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>
A fine life, a good night. 

By Tushar.G 90-D, Eswaripuri colony Sainikpuri post Hyderabad 

I'm a college dropout, currently living in my parents' house and feeling terrible about it. I write because I must, because it's a release like Bukowski once said. Sorry about the awfully short bio. 

A fine life, a good night 

I’m not letting that thing into my house, Mrs.veni said resolutely with her arms crossed. She stood at the door way staring down at her husband, Mr.veni and the “thing” which was a puppy, a really small one, both of whom were completely drenched in the rain that was battering down. The first thing that Mr.veni wanted to inform her was that it jolly well wasn’t her house, it was in fact, entirely his, passed down from his parents (R.I.P), the second thing was that he was a grown man and if he wanted to bring a damn puppy into his own house, He damn well could. Then he realized the folly in informing her of said facts (Mrs.veni had a notorious reputation for making the lives of the people around her really uncomfortable should she please so) and instead, like a reasonable adult, decided to beg and plead his wife for entry into the house. His house. 

Mr.Veni, whose first name does not concern us, was always bringing home strays; dogs, cats, birds, geckos, and a couple of times, children, street urchin who’d ask him for money and to whom he’d counter propose a meal at his house. They usually made it clear that they preferred cash, but he’d insist on a meal. On the few occasions that happened, Mrs.Veni made it abundantly clear what she thought about the whole thing and she would blatantly refuse to serve either of them any food. But he would get the children inside, seat them on the dining table and serve the child himself, all the time bracing himself for the storm that was brewing on his horizon, courtesy his loving wife. 

But no matter how much his wife yelled at him, prodded him, threw things at him or accidentally put Ajinimoto  in his tea instead of sugar (the timing cannot be a coincidence EVERY SINGLE TIME, he silently protested to himself.) Mr.veni kept bringing the needy, lost and hungry to his house. What his wife (and Mr.veni himself sometimes) failed to understand was that Mr.veni was one of those people: he just couldn’t not help someone or something if they asked for it, or howled for it, or purred for it, or chirped for it, or vaguely communicated it through body language. He was a kind soul, unfortunately for him. 

Tonight, as the rain thumped down on their 3 bedroom independent house on the suburbs of an unmentioned locality in this fair country of ours (where plenty needed helping, and for every single helper there was a Mrs.veni) Mr.veni did what he always did, he took a beating, not literally of course, it was mostly verbal. But he soon realized that it was one of those times where his wife was not going to budge and he was going to have to improvise (like the time he’d invited a malnourished broomstick selling women and her infant child to lunch and mrs.veni did what mrs.veni always did; throw a fit, so he took the both of them out to a restaurant. He seemed oblivious to the dirty stares the proprietor shot towards him, but the poor woman was not and her gratitude was real when he said goodbye to her with a package of food for later consumption) So, he did what he found himself doing quite a bit after he got married; compromise and improvise. 

He left the shivering puppy on the front verandah, went into HIS house, rummaged around and re emerged with the following things; a cardboard box into which he’d made a puppy sized hole, a bunch of old newspapers with which he insulated said carboard box with the puppy sized hole, an old (not so old as mrs.veni pointed out sulking) t-shirt, and a saucer with milk in it. Next he dried the puppy with the t-shirt and used the same for bedding and watched the animal lap up the milk greedily, (he refilled it a couple of times till the pup seemed to be full) before laying it into the box. The pup seemed to get the idea as it went in, sniffed around, and curled up at a corner of the box and looked up at mr.veni as if to say “we’re all good here.” Mr.veni scratched its furry head and watched the pup drift off into sleep. 

He sighed and stood up and mentally prepared for the onslaught that was about to come before stepping back into the house, and mrs.veni, never one to disappoint, tore him a new one even before his bottom was inside the door. He sighed again (internally) and sat down to eat his food and tried his best to tune his wife out while he ate his dinner. While she went on and on about how she should have married Raghu Sharma, her college sweetheart who’d promised to take her to the U.S if she’d married him, about how her friends were living in the plush corners of the shinier side of new Delhi, and how he (mr.veni) had failed to even give her a child, and what a loser he was and so on and so forth. Mr.veni thought about the pretty French lady who’d smiled at him three weeks ago at the embassy where he worked, and how her pretty green eyes squinted up when she did so and about the deep seated longing and pain he’d felt in his chest when he realized that he’d probably never see her again, and even if he did, there was nothing he could do about it. Life was done and settled for Mr.veni, he’d grow old with his bitch of a wife eating away at his ears till he died. He felt a familiar sadness creep up on him, the kind that had slowly and steadily made its home in is heart over the course of his adult life. It seemed to grow with him as he grew older. 

Mrs veni by now had moved on to how her sister had just gotten a child (the child was 4 years old and was unnaturally fat for a 4 year old and was already a bully, much like mrs.veni, come to think of it, an overbearing personality in all senses of the word seemed to be a pre-requisite when it came ms.veni’s family) and how happy she was and how fulfilled she felt, much unlike poor mrs.veni herself who felt like “suiciding” 12 times a day and just might do it one of these days. Mr.veni kept the next thought that came into his head to himself, much like most thoughts that came into his head. He concentrated on his dal fry as his thoughts reverted to the pretty French lady. He knew she was French because she belonged to the group of activists who’d come down from Paris to help start up a school for the underprivileged as a joint effort by the two governments, they’d come to the embassy to invite them to the opening of the school. She wasn’t strikingly beautiful but mr.veni fancied he saw some greater beauty in her steady green eyes; she was a good woman, he thought to himself. It was not possible for someone to look so lovely, so heart wrenchingly beautiful without being kind. And when their eyes had met, she’d smiled at him as her male colleague talked on about the school (“we’d like to keep the local tradition of an opening ceremony that prays for good luck and the blessings of….”) he’d smiled back (thank god) even as all the blood in his body seemed to rush into his usually pale face and turn it into a traffic light. Much to his relief, she didn’t extend the smile to everyone else; it was theirs, a special little treat, a secret understanding of…well of what it didn’t matter. But they’d connected, and that was enough. 

He finished eating and mrs.veni was still at it, now it was something about how her life was a living hell and mr.veni was the devil in charge of it. He ignored her and went out to check on the pup, it was fast asleep and looked warm enough, the rain had stopped as well. He stepped out into his yard where he’d made a little garden and lit a cigarette, mrs.veni stayed inside the house thankfully. He’d officially quit smoking years ago, and had unofficially picked it up again around the same time. He’d cut down a lot though, he barely smoked a couple of them a day, but the post dinner cigarette had become something of a ritual. He’d suffer his wife’s company at the dining table, eat as fast as he could without choking, then step out into his little garden of tomatoes, beans, and tea plants and a couple of other such varieties and light one up. It was a meditation of sorts, a calm and non-judgmental activity where his mind took a break and his lungs rejoiced in the toxic fumes of the killing stick. He made a ring and shot it towards the half moon and watched it rise up lazily, and then he made a smaller one and made it go through the first one. He was good with smoke rings, always had been. Then he thought of the pretty French lady again, and he smiled, maybe he’d talk to her when he went to the opening function. Maybe they’d really hit it off and become good friends. Maybe they’d fall in love and she would ask him to leave his wife and come away with her and he’d run home and pack his bags and run out again before his wife could say anything. She could keep the house and the car, he’d be fine, as long as he was with HER. 

He blew one more ring into the night and sighed, as long as he was dreaming he’d like to have a child with her. 

Night of the Big Love 

Sometimes in life, and only sometimes, perhaps one could say those are pretty rare times, but sometimes, things go exactly as you would want them to, and without you doing a darn thing about it. Like the time you rolled the dice and got three sixes in a row, much to the astonishment and frustration of your friends, or the time you caught a glass mid air just as it was about to hit the ground at the bar and the pretty girl sitting a couple of stools away sees it and you make eye contact and you smile at her like you’re a professional falling glass catcher and she smiles back. Smooth. You get the idea, things somehow just go the right way, for reasons that you do not understand, and the next thing you know you’ve got the completely bamboozled, wondering how such a wonderful thing could be happening to you. For Mr.veni, it was one of those times. 

He’d gone to the school function, and luckily Mrs.veni had other preoccupations (she went out with the only person she seemed to care for, her intolerable sister.) So it was just him, and his hope of seeing HER again and maybe catching that smile again, and maybe talk to her and maybe maybe maybe maybe. ‘Oh grow up’, he told himself. This isn’t high school, and you’re a married man. ‘I’m a married man’, he thought with dejection. Christ, how had it happened? But all thoughts of dejection and regret would go straight out of Mr.veni’s head in a few moments and be replaced with something completely different, something he’d not felt in quite some time. Because as it turned out to be, the pretty French lady with the green eyes was there, and she did smile at him, and she did come up to him, and they did talk, and it was a surprisingly good talk (by either one of their judgment). 

Her name, she told him, was Thea Beaulieu, and she was a teacher. She worked for a Non-profit Organization that gave underprivileged children free education in developing countries. When he asked, she told Mr.Veni that her last name meant ‘a beautiful place’, Mr.veni thought it was an apt name. As she spoke her voice seemed to dance with the soft jazz music that was playing, as if both soundwaves clashed and dance with each other. She told him about the place where she was currently living, a cozy two bedroom flat that she’d with a wide balcony that overlooked a lake, about her neighbors who were always bringing her food, and how their children always laughed and crowded around her whenever they saw her and how the teenage son of her next door neighbor seemed to have a crush on her (‘the little punk’, Mr.veni thought). 

They talked for a long time, and when they finally split up, she promised she would find him again in a bit. And she did. And they talked and talked and they laughed and neither of them seemed to notice the stares they were getting from some of their colleagues. And then it was time to go, and as people started leaving one by one she’d asked him if he would like to stay back a while and help her clean up the place, and then he could walk her home if he wanted. A darn good plan if I’ve heard one, he thought to himself, sure, he told her. So he picked up the paper cups and the tissues and took the garbage out while she cleaned out the tables and put the chairs back, the music played on. 

After, they stepped out and she locked the school gates and they set out walking towards her house and it started drizzling, not too hard, and just right. They walked in comfortable silence, sharing a cigarette that she’d lit, enjoying the pleasant weather. When they reached her house she turned to him and smiled and told him she had a good time, he agreed. Then she asked him if he wanted to go out the following weekend to watch a play in the city, he said he’d love to. Then he told her he’d never seen a play in his life. She laughed and told him he just might like it, he thought he probably would. After taking down her number they shook hands, awkwardly, a handshake being an odd thing in the midst of love one could suppose, then she turned and walked into her building, waving before stepping in. 

As Mr.veni walked back to his car the rain picked up and soon it was battering down again, as if it was holding back to compliment the moment. But he didn’t walk any faster, he walked and as he got drenched he smiled to himself. He smiled all the way to his car and he smiled as he drove and he smiled at the traffic policeman and he smiled at the rain and at the yellow street lamps and at nothing. Life, he felt, was a fine thing on nights like these. 