From: iqbal judge <iqbaljudge_1@yahoo.co.in>
Date: 27 June 2018 at 11:03
Subject: SUBMISSION
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

*Biographical sketch*: I am 60 years old,  retired recently as a Professor and Head, PG Dept. of English, Govt. College for Girls, Sector 11, Chandigarh, after sometimes frustrating but mostly energising, fulfilling and rewarding  35 years of teaching and learning. Engagement with the fine arts, theatre and literature are my abiding interests, along with a zeal to campaign on gender issues, especially with children and young adults. Engagement with the fine arts, theatre and literature are my abiding interests, along with a zeal to campaign on gender issues, especially with children and young adults. The intensity and evocativeness of the short story form excites and inspires me to use it to depict the changing nature of interpersonal relationships. 

*The Wait.* 

Winter had set its grip tight, creeping stealthily through the multiple layers of vests, sweaters, socks, cap and muffler that she wore.  Gets colder every year, she muttered, pulling the blanket closer around her scrawny shoulders, tucking it in around her legs, but the icy air sneaked in through the folds, nippy shards lacerating her to the bone. In the ragged patch of the weak sunrays that exhaustedly reached the balcony, she sat knitting amid brief lapses into sleep, her gnarled trembling fingers mechanically knitting a mesh of knit and purl, another sweater to combat the chill. 

These past two years had been the hardest. In and out of hospital, when even the Deriphylin and the SOS inhalers succumbed to the winter’s pincer grip, she had to be revived with strong gusts of oxygen and the nebulizer. These doctors know nothing, she had railed bitterly, rejecting their diagnosis of ‘It’s old age, Mataji, your lungs are very weak’. 

‘Bah!’she had scoffed, ‘even I know that!..Every one grows old…what kind of doctor are you if you can’t cure me?’ 

Each winter, her family thought she wouldn’t survive, but somehow she wheezed on, and now they merely rolled their eyes in a ‘there she starts off again’ when she lamented, ‘*Hai Rabba*! Why don’t you carry me off?’ Perhaps deep down they admitted it would probably be best if He would, for she was so old and decrepit now, and had really nothing to look forward to in life. Her husband had died many years earlier, leaving behind a legacy of genteel frugality. Saurabh, her son, had long been lost to Canada. Perhaps God had meant it for the best when her daughter Kiran’s marriage of twelve years had ended unhappily, and she had returned to her parental home with two kids in tow, for it was she on whom the responsibility of care had fallen ever since age and illness had taken over. 

It was a burden that was beginning to be irritably voiced as tedious and tiresome. Every time she had one of her asthma attacks or a bout of fever, it meant Kiran had to take leave from work or Rohan had to skip college to rush her to the clinic; Ishita, who had recently started her first job with a newspaper, could only pitch in at odd hours. Kiran wasn’t the kind to mince matters. The auto fares, the doc’s fees and the medicine bills were recited loud and long, not just to her, but also to Mrs. Mehra next door, to Bittu’s Mummy on the top floor, to the Sabherwals across the road, and, much to her chagrin, even to Ishita and Rohan. Initially, she had countered the grumbling by alluding to her late husband's pension, but had to surrender to abashed silence in the wake of the taunting ‘Huh! What pension? Do you know, it doesn’t even cover the milk bills! She talks of the pension as if it were the Laat sahib’s income!’ 

It hadn’t always been like this. In sunnier times, over a decade ago, when Kiran had moved in with Ishita and Rohan, she was very much in charge, and more than generous, she thought. She was sprightly enough for her age, rising at day-break to say her prayers and plan her culinary creations for the day. Waves of delight coursed through her when Ishita squealed excitedly at being served a parantha with a beaming sun stenciled on it, or Rohan slurped up a smoothie with a ‘Wow, Nani, *tussi* great *ho*!’ The ‘ *dabba*’ she packed for Kiran used to be a treat for her colleagues at the AG office—even the humble ‘*khichri*’ would be finger-licking good, exoticised with vegetables and a glaze of pure ghee. Then, while Kiran briskly braided Ishita’s hair, she would help Rohan with his tie and belt, and after they were gone in a flurry of last-minute coaxing to drink one la-ast sip of  Bournvita and anxious injunctions to cross the road carefully,  she would unwind over a cup of tea at her favourite spot in the balcony. 

The sudden shouts of ‘Out! Out!’ by a group of rambunctious boys in the playground roused her and for a brief confused moment she thought one of them was her Saurabh, hooting with excitement and kicking up the dust. Saurabh, whom she had doted on; Saurabh, with his winning ways and his insouciance; “ Coming Ma”, he would holler, and then continue to play, quite oblivious to her standing resolutely in the balcony, arms akimbo. Saurabh, to whom it was almost impossible to say ‘no’; yes, even when he asked her to let him go, so far away that he never returned… 

Did she know that he wouldn’t? Well, the fears were always there, ghosts lurking in the dark. “ Aww Mumma, I’ll be just a phone call away”, he had assured, his radiant smile and warm embrace driving those demons away. And he always meant to keep in touch, to write or phone, but as he pointed out when she called-- life was so busy, she couldn’t ever imagine how tough it was to get a moment’s respite, she with her laid–back life in her little nest. 

She hardly spoke of him now. How long can you keep making excuses for the son who cannot come home even when you’ve broken a hip, and are in hospital, crying for him, but he’s moved too far away to hear? She had been heart-broken then. Kiran was proved right after all. Their mother was going to be only her  responsibility. 

4th November, 2006, 11am. Neither Kiran nor she would ever forget it. Kiran, sipping her tea and planning a visit to the new Handloom Exhibition with her colleagues, when the house-help’s frightened summons rang.  Bibiji had fallen in the bath, was crying in pain and couldn’t move. The awful sight of her  mother splayed across the bathroom floor, blood trickling across her head, moaning in agony, covered with just the towel and sheet that the maid had thrown over her, waiting for help. Frantic calls for ambulance, doctor, rummaging in the cupboard for money, requesting the grumpy neighbour to hand over the house keys to the children, Mummy howling in pain at attempts to lift her, and then the doctor’s verdict—hip replacement surgery required. 

And who was there to help her out? Saurabh, Mummy’s *‘laadla’*? Huh, he said he had just taken up a new job, so leave was out of the question. And he’d been out of work for some months, hadn’t told them because Mummy would worry, so sending money too was not going to be easy. He’d try, though, he said, did call to find out how Mummy was, and had spoken to her a few times when she returned from hospital, but that was it. Much later, he sent a hundred-dollar cheque, while she, Kiran, had to dip into her savings, and though the operation cost was met by selling Mummy’s gold coins, the loss was Kiran’s again, in a way—Ishita would get that much less at her wedding. 

Kiran believed she had aged ten years in one. Sometimes she would catch a glimpse of herself in the mirror --her mouth seemed to have settled in a grim line that rarely curved upward, the smear of lipstick only aggravating the hardness; her forehead was now permanently creased with the burden of unending feeding, sponging, changing clothes, escorting her mother to the toilet….  She would pick up the cream with a tired little sigh. Pretty herself? For what? 

The children had to grow up too, suddenly. For Nani was no longer able now to make their favourite ‘*choori’* and cosset them after a hard day at school. Rohan had to shut his ears to the evening whoops of excitement with the bat and friends; he had to be at Nani’s bedside as the strong one to lift and help prop up on the bed and support her reassuringly when she began to take hesitant, fearful steps with her ‘walker’. On Ishita, labouring under the stress of Board exams in her final year at school, fell the responsibility of sharing night-duty with Kiran. Though conscious of their sacrifices, as an invalid she could do nothing more than quaver out, ‘God bless you *Beta*…*khush raho…*’ punctuated by ‘*hai.. hai’*s of pain. 

It was an agonizing, arduous climb back to a precarious perch of health; by the time she recovered, much of the gaiety and togetherness had slipped away from their lives. The outings at the cinema, the *chaat*- and *golgappa* treats and window-shopping trips faded into the recesses of half-forgotten memories. The children soon got caught up with studies, friends and the turbulent tides of adolescence; there was less and less to say to their Nani, who seemed to have regressed in time while they were taking giant leaps forward. She increasingly began to feel redundant—no longer did Rohan need her to help pack his school bag; Ishita was perpetually on a diet, and in fact held her ladling of ghee and sweets responsible for the fat that she could pinch between her fingers, and neither of them wanted to wear her hand-knits any more. Things were happening too, that made her frown and purse her lips tight—the children’s late nights out, Rohan’s increasing surliness and Ishita wearing all that make-up and skimpy dresses, but her disapproval was met either with resigned grimaces or Kiran’s admonitions not to criticize the youngsters, even though she too sometimes got upset at their assertions of ‘it’s my life’. So it was mainly Shanti, the bai, whom she spoke to during the day, and partook of the souped–up lives of harassed daughters-in law and scheming aunts on TV. Kiran, embroiled in the vortex of negotiating the tricky terrain of widely differing worlds and views, found herself snapping more and more at her mother’s increasing dependence and sympathy cravings. She had long run out of patience with her mother’s slow, tremulous movements as she made vain attempts to help chop and peel vegetables, considering that in that much time she would have cooked the entire day’s meals, and not have had to pick up clumsily shelled peas and cucumber peels from the floor. Washing dishes or clothes was out of the question. “*Bas*, you stay well… save me from the trips to the doctor… that will be the biggest help’, Kiran said every time. 

So all she did now, was to huddle up in bed or in this corner of the balcony, and watch the world hurtle past through the ashen haze of deteriorating faculties, with only her thoughts for company. And practically every thought seemed dipped in the acrid bile of regret, despair, resentment, thwarted hopes, so that it caught in her throat, and emerged in frantic wheezing gasps for air. Old age is such a curse, Oh God, why don’t you take me away, she thought for the umpteenth time, and then, along with it, as always, rose the fear, the over-riding fear of death. How does it feel, this dying? 

Earlier, she used to think, What will happen to me, will I know what’s going on when I’m dead, will I be aware of them crying and lamenting—or perhaps they will be just sighing with relief that at last it’s over, she’s gone now—will I feel them bathe me, carry me in the van, and then place me on the pyre, set me aflame?  But now, increasingly, over the past few months, even though she tried to shut it out, the image haunted her; she could feel those greedy flames licking into her, and her screams to take her off the fire for God’s sake, help! help, going unheard--she reached out, as always, for her inhaler, taking deep, agitated breaths, her neck muscles taut, her pupils wide with fear. 

Shadows were beginning to lengthen over the balcony. She’d complete the row she was knitting, and then go in. 

“Kiran…Kiran *beti*…” she called out weakly, then recollecting that her voice barely rose above a whisper nowadays, she reached for the bell near her and waited. 

Wasn’t it more than five minutes, and no one had come? She rang the bell timidly again. Kiran  got annoyed if she rang the bell too quickly or too often. “ No patience you have, Mummy, “ she would say irritably, “ What’s the tearing hurry? It’s not as if you’re going to work!” 

The boys had ceased their play and were heading home. The mandir loudspeaker began belching out the tuneless voices of women. Must be Tuesday, their kirtan usually starts at 6, no wonder I’m feeling so cold, she surmised, sneezing and sniffling, wrapping her blanket closer, curling into herself.  The concluding verses of the holy scriptures came unbidden: ‘*You have become old, and you do not understand that death is overtaking you… insane creature! Why do you not remember God?...meditate on the Lord; He shall be your only Help and Support in the end’. *Had her time come? The thought brought on the chill again. “ *Hey Rabba*…Kiran, Kiran…Ishita… *koi hai*…” she quavered, anxiety mounting with each sneeze. 

In the kitchen, Kiran was busy frying pakoras and preparing sandwiches—Ishita’s newly made journo friends from the office had dropped in. Ishita was in her bedroom, music on loud, chatting animatedly in between trips to the kitchen for drinks and eats. Lighthearted laughter seemed to blow away the  sombre air of the house. With the pakoras spluttering, the exhaust fan roaring, Beyonce singing, mandir women chanting, her bell, its battery fading, fainted away. 

“ Here, these are the last,” Kiran  switched off the stove and removed her apron. “Give Nani some pakoras, too.” 

Ishita moved to her grandma’s room, popping an onion pakora  into her mouth,  licking chaat masala off her fingers. “Nani,” she called, peeping in. “ Where’s Nani?” she asked nonplussed, seeing the empty bed and armchair. 

“ Isn’t she…Oh God, she must be still on the balcony ” Kiran rushed out, beginning to scold when she saw her mother hunched into a little ball, whimpering and shivering. “Look at you!  Why didn’t you ring the bell? Hundred times I have told you, don’t sit out in the cold, given you the bell also, but you just won’t listen…” But her mother could only shake her head, teeth rattling with cold, her hands still clutching the bell. 

The New Year has arrived. The city, though reeling under frost and fog, has ushered it in with customary ‘dhol’-beats and raucous, drunken cries. The air is rife with celebration. Ishita and Rohan are part of the milling crowds, pinning all their hopes and desires on the miracles that each new 365-day cycle is supposed to herald. The midnight din of drums beating, cars and mobikes honking and revving past, and the tipsy song and laughter of revelers has disturbed her. Unable to sleep, she tosses restlessly on the bed, wheezing and coughing. Kiran has tried to ‘celebrate’ with a dash of rum and the stars on TV, and comes in to check on her mother and plant a New Year kiss on her cheek. She can only mutter a perfunctory *‘khush raho’* through her distressed urgings for more blankets and a re-heated water bottle. The doctor has told Kiran not to bring her all the way to the hospital again, nothing more can be done for her. 

“ I saw Papaji in my dream today” she tells Kiran. 

Papaji? Kiran asks, puzzled. 

“Yes, Papaji—my father, your Nanaji. He was wearing a blue blazer and Khaki shorts.” 

“Shorts and a blazer?” 

‘Yes, that’s what he used to wear….That’s how they dressed in those days, when he was young’, she says emphatically. Kiran is silent, exchanges a glance with Ishita. She rambles on. “The gate had a notice,’ School closed’ but there was no reason given why. The chowkidar also didn’t know. Come along, said Papaji… He’s come on his motor cycle.” 

Earlier, they would have laughed off this delirious rambling as a joke, even ribbed her about it in her lucid moments, but now they are quiet, their eyes full of an unspoken awareness. Kiran’s brusque manner has softened over the days; though she has had to take leave from work to tend to her mother’s increased needs, there is a rough tenderness in her behavior; at times she seems almost tearful. 

A strange silence has descended on the house. Kiran and Ishita keep vigil in turns. Ishita sits in her Nani’s room, trying to read her book. Every now and then her eyes stray to the small hump on the bed that is her grandmother’s form. She can barely bring herself to look at this decrepit wreck, the leathery skin like burnt toast, from which her skeletal frame juts out. It is inconceivable that this could be the same Nani whose plump, rounded contours she used to snuggle into as a little girl. The face is a shriveled raisin, the dimpled cheeks are now hollows, toothless gums sporadically making sucking sounds. Now and then she gets restive and flaps her hands about, as if grasping at something.  Ishita makes soft cooing sounds and clasps her hand. Kiran comes in with a small cup of Horlicks and holds a spoonful to her lips, urging her to open her mouth. She lies straight, sleeping fitfully, her feet sticking out of the quilt and blankets, the long nails twisted into talons. Rohan hates to come near. He sits in the other room, unseeingly surfing channels on the muted TV, ears strained to catch any sound from his Nani’s room. 

She lies still on the bed—gone, almost. The weak quiver of her chest after long, slow minutes indicates the breath that wisps faintly through. Kiran has chalked  a *‘laxman- rekha’* around her on the bed, to ward off the ants that have begun trailing the scent of death hovering in the air. The eyes are closed; she seems barely conscious of anyone around her.  “*Ghab… ghabrahat… hoti hai*” she whispers once in a while, plucking at the bed-clothes, and Kiran pours a few drops of a homeo tincture  down her throat to relax her heart. 

By midnight the wait is over. 

