From: arathy asok <arathyasok@gmail.com>
Date: 30 June 2018 at 19:08
Subject: submission
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Bio: Arathy Asok has published short stories and poems in national and international journals. She hopes of w world beyond the green sky and white walls. 

thank you arathy 

*SUZANNE OF THE PURPLE FLOWERS* 

She did not know that the flowers were out. In the evening when she stepped on the road, she was surprised to see purple flowers on the tree. She kept walking. She did not want to stop then. The man walking in front of her clouded her eyes with the smoke he was puffing out. As she overtook him, the tree passed her by. She waved her hand in front of her face as she moved ahead of him. She walked hurriedly further on, growing eyes behind her. The purple flowers stared back at her. When it touched her cheeks, the evening came to settle on its finger tips. She did not see the man opposite the road watching the rhythm of her breasts. 

When the shadows of the morning lengthen out in the spilling sunlight, she stretches out on the cane chair, staring at the split floor. Sometimes a wind laden with bits of cold float in through the front door. The pencil lying on the floor near the wilted leaf that are stuffed into a thin vase draw a line near her eyes. Morning’s work was done. In between. When the clock had lost its rhythm she did not feel like lifting the needle and finishing the flower at the edge of the saree. There is much work to finish, many flowers to be stitched. Yet how languidly each day stands by her. 

Mother listened with sharp ears to the sounds from other rooms. The drool of the refrigerator, the occasional moving of the fan, the floating crow feather. Other than that no other sound echoed in the house. One had to walk a long distance from the gate to reach the house. The main road was half a kilometer away. Blinded by trees, one could not see the road. Sounds from blaring horns reached the house as if in an echo. An occasional sky whizzing past took care not to crush the silence. Mother kept her eyes closed most of the time. Sometimes, she went and stood near to look at the gentle rise and fall of the shrunken stomach. The veins near her eyes stood out as she concentrated. At times when she lifted her eyes from the examination, she was shocked to see her mother’s black-blue eyes alight on her. They look silently at each other till she sees understanding creep behind the veil of her mother’s eye. Then she turns sharply away. Anger floods inside her because she knows what her mother is thinking.  They rarely speak.  Between them they wait for the other to say something.  The mother is tired. She scarcely gets out of the bed except to urinate. When she shouts loud enough mother decides to take bath. It is a ritual. First she heats the water in the huge aluminum vessel. The wood near the hearth is dry. The summer is hot. Heat weaves like dry leaves she lets lie on the front of the house.  She sweeps only once in two or three days. The pain in her hip makes it difficult for her to bend down for a long time. And she can now no longer afford to ask the old maid to come because they are financially strained. They live on her mother’s widow pension. The income she gets from stitching the flowers is meager. She cannot sit for long. Her back aches. Her eyes pain. The huge jackfruit in front sheds leaves with vengeance. Every morning the leaf loads make the house more forlorn. The paint has already dimmed. They painted it a long time ago. Maybe six years. Time before her mother took to bed. 

She lifted the needle and fiddled with it. 

Sometimes old women stand inside her head in the dark waiting for their shadows to fall on her letting her know that there is some light left in cobwebbed corners. 

The old mother at home is an ache. She is a presence when she eats. Each fistful of rice she puts into her mouth the mother feeds on. Mother has lost her appetite. She pecks at the few spots of rice on her plate. So she mashes up the rice with butter milk and forcibly pours it down the mother’s throat. When she breaks the omelet she feels the skin of the older woman in her tongue. She feels like vomiting and does not get up. She eats bit after bit of old wrinkled skin. She waits for the woman to move a little to that she can spit out the muzzled egg with spit that clings on to the roof of her mouth. 

The old women in her dreams. They urinate on her stomach. They lift their hands and curse her when she does not look back. They sleep around her in the dark. They wait outside the door of her toilet when she urinates or passes stools. They wait for her to come home late in the night, their white hair burning in the flames of the kerosene lamp. She walks in the rain. She watches the velichapadu swinging his anklets and digging his toes in the dirt. She looks at the grey sky of wet rain. She stands in blue rooms with throatful of books. She sits on the black floor before lying down on their laps. She feels their shaky fingers pull out white lice from long white hairs. She turns around to see a line of brown ants creeping on the wall near the parapet. She fills herself in the basket chair when she does not want to go to sleep. She sees their smoke rising up in the evening sky when she goes for walks in the old paddy fields. She watches them hold on to their toothless mouths when they speak to people, grabbing to the last bit of prestige they think they own. She sees it all and she is full of it. She is the old woman who finished living their lives who begin to live their lives in her. 

How she wants to escape. To run away when her feet itches. To wring the soft old necks with hanging flesh loose, to feel it come through her fingers. She wakes up in the night looking wild at the blankness in front, not wanting to remember the single dream she keeps on having, of an old woman hanging upside down laughing at her in a toothless void and she running, running away into the far untamed, and she falling down and tumbling and a hand, a hand lifting her up to seat her on the heat before he begins to lick her. Then she wakes up. Heat on her body, in her loins and she does not know what to do. Her mother stares from the other room she knows. Her mother sees through the dark. She wills her quickened breath to still because she knows her mother hears. She is ashamed. In the morning when she wakes up she tries not to look at the mother when she dips the bread into the milk but she feels the black-blue eyes alight on her and she wants to hit the cheek now shrunken. She does not look up. 

Now she walks. She walks within her the purple flowers and when she reaches the corner she turns. There he is. The shop is crowded. People have all come after a day’s end to buy things for their house. Rice, lentils, vegetables, mosquito coils, pencils. She waits at the edge of the rows watching his face as he listens to what they say. His thin back turning around to pack things they have said. Him waiting in a line before the shopkeeper to list out the things he has packed. She wills him to turn his ancient eyes on her. His small eyes placed on the two sides of a broad nose. What does she see in him? Why does she stand here every evening for the packet of milk or the loaf of bread or some potatoes she must buy? She does not ask herself the question. She does not because it has never entered her to question it. An evening like this when the corner store had not opened she ventured to come a bit further to the end of the street to find this shop with the old squat shop owner and his two assistants walking hither and thither packing the things people called out from the counter. The shop was not new. But she had not come there before. She mumbled in a small voice what she wanted to buy and the old man and his middle aged assistant looked at her in wonder. They thought she was dumb. At that moment came another lady who drew their attention and they looked away. She stood silent for a minute before she felt the single finger touch her hand lightly to ask what she wanted and the head bend down to catch the words she mumbled again. A dwarf. His head barely reaching her breasts.Pimples on his skin. His body thin with long arms dangling at the sides. He packed everything she asked and told her the amount. He asked her for her shopping basket and placed everything carefully into it. When he gave her the basket, he took care not to touch her and his eyes were down cast. But when she turned the corner of the road where the shop ended she turned back a second to watch him watch her. Another day another time she catches a glimpse of him at the dentist when she goes to the tailor shop to return the stitched sarees. He sees her on the road and blinks to remember. The next evening she looks him in the eye with a boldness that he hangs his head in shame and thus every evening. She waits for the crowd to dispel to move forward. The middle aged man sometimes steps in to take her order and she speaks  more silently than ever that the man mutters angrily before pushing him forward to attend to her. And then she looks into his eyes to find him blinking at her. Each time a look like he tried to remember who she was. Where he has seen her before. And each time she wills him to remember the first touch of his finger on her skin. Every time she tries to break his politeness. And she watches the blush creeping up his skin. 

And then a day she crosses the road to find the purple flowers on the road. The road a huge purple flower. And him not at the shop. She points at the potatoes for the man to pack and her foot drags behind her. When she turns the corner, he is waiting looking at the sky the long road of purple behind him and she walks past him knowing  he walks behind her and when she reaches her gate she turns around letting the potatoes spill. He looks at her as she bends to pick them and looks up at him all the while she picks them up. She closes the gate behind her the evening sky pink on her. 

That night when she feeds her mother she is careful not to hurry. She does not want her to know the increased rate of her pulse, the drumming of the heart beat like thunder. She puts off the light and walks out feeling the pain at her back shoot inside. She sits at her chair to stitch those flowers she saw on the road. She stitches a bunch and then another and she hear the door latch clicking. She moves like a lightning for her mother not to hear and she opens the night air inside. He stands there politely, his thin form cold in the night. She puts out a hand to gather him and closes the door silently and leaves the door of her room open as usual. He waits for her to touch him, for her to remove his clothes. She does not know where to begin. And all the old women they come out of the attic, out of her trunks, outside the wall and they lay him down for her. They watch her as she slowly touches him and lays down next to him. They lift her legs to place it on his thighs; they catch her throat to still her moan. When he climbs on her and drives himself into her they wipe her tears that came in pain. When he walks away not looking back a moment nor uttering a word, they sit around her to wipe away the sticky whiteness between her legs. They hold her hand, they hold her feet, they hold her hips, they hold her face. They look into her to see if she has left. All they mumble are the words “Suzanne of the purple flowers, Suzanne of the purple flowers.” And when she smiles at them, they smile back a road of purple flowers she walked that evening when the pink settled on her in the sun. 

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ 