From: NIVEDITA NATH <niveditanath@ucla.edu>
Date: Sun, 1 Jul 2018 at 13:30
Subject: Submission
To: <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>

*Time of Healing* 

Two young girls stand next to the banyan tree. I need not give you a date or a location, for we have dispensed with these bygone rituals of authors of old. Only poets and musicians can be entrusted with such sorcery. For there are no such things as seasons any longer- no cycles to calibrate, no calendars to contemplate. The cloak has been pulled off the clocks, and now we inhabit the wreckage left behind by Trickster Time (all Times are proper nouns). 

Stories told on the rings of tree bark tell of a Dream Time of harmony. When people would/ will pay heed to the sun as it strode/ strides across the horizon. A Dream Time where the toil and pleasure of bird and beast turn like sun-shadows. Vanaja can still decipher the hieroglyphs inscribed in her name. *Vana-ja; *a Sanskrit compound denoting one who is born of the forest. She knows her name is also a spell that can conjure figures of fecund goddesses who sculpt their bodies into tree-branches. She unwraps the faded blue scarf buried in her pocket and holds it against the light. 

‘It feels like ice...Hail destroyed the fresh buds of the marigolds I planted’, Vanaja says softly. Eva strokes her back, reaching for the coarse textured cloth. ‘You see, this is our inheritance,’ she says. Bells chime in a sudden gust of wind. ‘The gift of having to add the descriptor ‘torrential’ to any talk of rainfall,’ she adds. ‘My nana used to tell me how the atom-men continued to dig and burn until there was nothing left to dig, until the smoke had become the air. The atom-men could measure time to the last millisecond, but their manic precision broke time itself.’ Vanaja weaves her slender frame through the banyan’s column like branches. She settles on one just thick enough to wrap her palms around. Eva nods as she passes her the scarf. If you look up at the rustling of the papery leaves you can catch a glimpse of fluttering colored cloths tied to the banyan’s branches. Tree and human residents of the city join spirits through these ties. Vanaja knots her scarf, renewing the ritual. 

The Great Banyan is the axis of the city. In the world of Trickster Time the tree was classed as an ‘epiphyte’ because it starts life by strangling the barks of other trees, sapping them of their energy. So, in the world of Trickster Time, banyan and host were two different things as unmixable as oil and water. Now the tree is a metaphor for interdependence. Now we see banyan and host as a couple united in the act of love. Bearing fruit for both the wasp and the songbird, sheltering crook and saint alike. 

Eva and Vanaja leave the shaded path leading out of the grove. They enter the neighborhood of Bawana, once notorious for the crimes of big capitalists and the struggles of workers. They glance past the locality’s communal crèche shaded against the mid-day heat by tall palms. Pushing their way onboard, they take the southbound metro rail towards the erstwhile Mughal gardens of Shalimar Bagh. Parallel to the tracks vacuum powered belts ferry fruits and vegetables from the farms of the outskirts into the city center. Passengers stand hypnotized by the sight of humble pulses and greens swirling and dancing against the sky. Eva and Vanaja disembark for lunch. 

The city’s kitchens are performances, not places. Tented ensembles of crockery and cooks sniff their way towards the largest pools of hunger. Each kitchen responds to the changing rhythms of labor. Eva and Vanaja join the circle of the feeding all sitting cross legged in front of plantain leaves. There are separate circles for crows, cows and dogs, to ensure that what is left of the cooking and the eating is not wasted. Bespectacled young computer coders donning aprons dole out heaps of rice and curry on their leaves. In the kitchens, workers of all trades take turns dicing, washing and serving. Vanaja offers some water to the ground before satiating her thirst. ‘Why did you choose to sister the banyan tree?’, Eva asks scooping up a warm handful of rice. She shakes her head at the sight of Vanaja lost in some solitary reverie and continues, ‘I always knew I would bind myself to the Jacaranda. It reminds me of the glistening Pacific shoreline.’ She notices Vanaja drift back into awareness of the here and now. ‘Nana said that in the time of her grandmother workers from the Mediterranean would immigrate each harvest season. Back home we would call them *golondrinas, *because they moved across the seas like swallows. That was before the peak of Trickster Time. Now I have moved West of West, settling here in the East. A swallow without her flock!’ Vanaja smiles contentedly as she folds her empty plantain leaf. ‘Let’s head to the river’, she speaks at last. ‘I’ll answer your question when we get there.’ 

The historians of Trickster Time had made monuments out of six ancient cities whose ruined fortresses were left crumbling by the riverbank. Now, the Yamuna River is the city’s sole monument. In the last years of the atom-men, the horizons had echoed with the ghoulish wailing of storms. Sheets of ice crenellating the Himalayas had dislodged onto the waters like battleships assailing the plains downstream. Now the girls have only a dead channel to walk along. ‘You had asked about the banyan’, Vanaja begins. ‘My mother fled here in the age of the atom-men. She was haunted by the memory of her mother’s corpse. Raped and mutilated, grandmother’s body was left hanging from the village’s banyan by her scarf. I’d like to think that her spirit was embraced and imbibed by the hollows of the tree.’ Along her ghostly course, citizens play the music of water gushing over rocks to coax Yamuna back to life. Hoping to touch the Time of Healing enfolded in her flow. 

END. 

Bio: Nivedita Nath is a PhD student at UCLA. She is   interested in the politics of knowledge production and her work considers interweaves between ecology and culture. 