From: merlin flower <merlin.flower@gmail.com>
Date: Tue, 28 Aug 2018 at 17:51
Subject: Submission
To: <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>

Bio: Merlin flower is an independent artist and writer. 


*High crack* 

Why wouldn’t he visit me? It’s been three years of worship. Time I could have spent building video games or watching movies. Of course, have to confess, there are obvious signs. Often, he leaves bits of apple, gooseberry or mango for me on the window sill. This onetime, even a slice of pineapple neatly cut. Yesterday, when I went near the temple the elephant showered me with water. See, I was the only one to get the blessing. Sure, all his doings but why wouldn’t he come? Why doesn’t he understand my desperation? 

Nandan says I have to be patient. 

‘Chota Master always visits his worshippers. Above that, he loves you because you are special. Be alert and watchful. He may come disguised as a snake or lizard,’ he keeps telling me. 

Nandan calls him ‘Lucifer’ during worship. However, he remains ‘Chota Master’ for all purpose. ‘Satan’ and ‘devil’ just doesn’t do it for me. I think it defeats the purpose. The name ‘Chota Master’ has a swag, if you ask me. 

Well, I came to him to experience joy. In a poignant irony, in the three years, I haven’t known any. The first year passed by learning the rules of satanic worship. The second year went away while I practiced the various theories. Since then, it’s been only worship like a walk on a gilded one way street with no traffic. 

The happiness I’d have felt otherwise, like in the launch of a new game, or the drowning of ants in water has been plundered from me. The more I chase, the more distant it gets, happiness. See, I am not complaining  but shouldn’t he have recognized me by now? I think my thirty years on the planet has been too heavy to handle even for me. Five years ago, I looked like a school kid. Now I look like a fifty year old. Wisdom ages people faster. 

Out in the garden, a squirrel is on a whimsical hunt for nonexistent nuts. 

I could taste my hunger all of a sudden. My tongue craved for sweets. I wanted *laddu, chocolate *or *jalebi*. My lips felt dry in spite of the constant lashings by the tongue. It was baffling, to say the least. I eat ever so often. 

‘It’s common,’ says Nandan, ‘Chota Master gets nourishment from his worshippers and he likes sweets. So eat them in plenty.’ 

‘*Kulalappam* is his favourite,’ said Nandan once.  I agreed. The hollow crunchy wafer must be to his liking, I’ve always thought.  Since I eat for two, like those bloomy pregnant ladies, I make it a point to eat an extra plate. It was hard at first. But the human body can be trained to do anything.  As a result, my lips have puffed up. From fifty, my weight has jumped. 

‘His mouth looks like a donkey’s ass,’ a boy teased me yesterday. His friend said, ‘Asshole, you mean?’ Chota Master will reply to them. I know for certainty that one of them would lose his hands while the other his legs. Right now they must be in some ‘accident and trauma care unit’ regretting the taunts. That’s the thing about Chota Master, you cand rely on him. 

Today feels like a bad day. I can already taste the bitterness in the air. As you can guess, the air speaks to me. Something is about to happen. But what? I took a piece of paper to jot on the things to avoid. 

A. Don’t step outside. If anyone knocks on the door, stay still. 

b. Avoid the stairs. 

C. Safest food to eat - biscuits and banana. 

D. Shower at home 

E. Kill five or six house flies 

F. Skip the scheduled tasks 

After all,  Chota Master will understand. I looked at my gold crusted watch, it showed 9 am. May be I ought to call Nandan after breakfast. 

‘I want to see Chota Master immediately,’ I could insist. I deserved it. 

When he had called me three years ago, he had said, ‘Listen Giri, I’ll tell you this story but only once so listen carefully,’ 

“Who are you?’ I had demanded. He disregarded my question and continued, ‘In ancient India there lived a peasant who made chappals out of bamboo shoots. He lagged under dire poverty. No one wanted to buy his chappals. The peasant grew disheartened. Finally, one day, the peasant retired to the forest. He found a cave and started meditating. Chota Master passing by the jungle was fascinated by the peasant. He woke up the peasant, telling him to go back to the city. The peasant obeyed. Soon, his chappals started selling like hot cakes. The more he increased the price of the chappals, the more it sold, such was the demand. The peasant became richer than the king of the land. He married the princess of the land and had two daughters. When they turned eighteen, Chota Master visited their mansion. The peasant couldn’t have been happier.  Now, Lucifer wanted to marry both the daughters. The peasant agreed to give him one of his daughters but Satan was adamant on getting both. By the time the peasant agreed, Chota Masterwanted his wife too. The peasant refused. So, Lucifer scorched the entire family. Never doubt him, Giri, never.’ 

Seriously, I listened to my instinct. Nandan’s voice had that rare honesty. Thus began a precious friendship that outlasted many relationships. I gave up smoking and alcohol. Even my day began as per Nandan’s instructions. 

Usually, I get up promptly at 5 am, sprinting to that green pond in the biting cold only because Chota Master wants me to. Yeah, Nanadan instructed but that’s what Chota Master likes- a pious follower. Chota Master has a precocious and naughty streak, I am told. 

Out the window, rectangle boxes with humans preoccupied the landscape with few Gulmohar trees here and there. When the trees flower, it’d be different as if the streets were on fire. Does Chota Master like those orange flowers too? When the birds landed on the orange flower to be killed by a green snake, did his brow crease in happiness?  Has he hunger for the blood spilled during accidents? Bengaluru, Chennai, Trivandrum or South India – did the location matter? 

My clammy head throbs like a vibrating phone. Maybe I should skip breakfast. 

I am indeed brooding yet again. First biscuit and then planning, I decided. My mobile beeps. 

“Nandan, I was thinking about you,’ I said in a fake upbeat tone. 

“Had breakfast?’ he arrives at the point directly. 

‘Was about to, Nandan…’ 

‘Eat first, then we’ll talk,’ 

‘Nanda,  why doesn’t he visit me?’ 

I could hear Nandan’s visible sigh at the other end. Nandan is a master of astral projection. Which meant he could travel anywhere on the planet without visa or passport. I am told, I would receive the same astral blessing after Kutty Chaatan’s visit. 

‘You have to be patient, Giri. Sooner or later, he will come to see you. Indeed, he may visit you today itself. Who knows?’ says Nandan. 

“Really? Are you sure?’ 

“Yes, but you have to do what pleases him the most. Don’t you know?’ 

‘Quite’.  I cut the call. 

I opened the huge refrigerator. No *laddu*. No *jalebi.* A half glass of tea sits dressed under a dark brown coat. A plate of jasmine flower, half faded. The biscuit packet ishalf gone too. Had I kept it outside, the ants would have polished it off. I don’t mind Chota Master eating them, but ants? No way. 

I finish off the biscuits as if I had been hungry for two years. 

Yesterday at the cemetery, I had dug out the grave of Ponnamma, an old fashioned name for a pretty young girl of just fifteen years old - dead forever. Chota Master likes pregnant women. Once I had sex with a pregnant prostitute. As I entered her, she burst into intense abuses like a song. Her feistiness charged me to delve deeper, faster. The sex itself was different as if making love to an alien. Well, Aparna had a voracious appetite and kept demanding more.  Her eruption of emotion went parallel to my erection. That was then. Five years ago, to be precise. Then, Chota Master confiscated my manhood. I never complained. Nandan says I’ll regain it with vigor soon enough. I believe him. You see, I couldn’t perform but my hunger for sex remains. 

Ponnamma had no appetite, understandably. Poor girl, murdered at home. She was eight months pregnant, according to the newspaper report.  However, I couldn’t find the fetus in her stomach. May be the child survived after all. The seed of a rapist, it would thrive. 

As per Nandan’s instructions, I kissed the girl tenderly and placed her back in that brown coffin. In what had almost become a routine, I chanted the 21 line mantra and offered marigold, jasmine and chrysanthemum to the coffin before lowering it back to warm Earth. 

Tell you what? There is no place on Earth as peaceful as graveyards. The once alive rest as harmless as can be. There remained, of course, the fact that Chota Master captured their souls because of me. I’ve never been caught. Not once in three years. That is down to the miracle of Chota Master. Also, well, I think it must be because of my nocturnal visits to the graveyard that I never weigh more than eighty kilos. Nanadan says I have to add five more kilos at least. Chota Master liked fat people, it seemed.  Was that why Chota Master never visited me? 

My mobile chimes. My mother 

‘Giri, won’t you come home today? It’s been months since I saw you. Your Dad is also worried. Look, we won’t ask you any questions. Just come home.” 

I cut the call. Home? what is home for me? My home would arrive whenever I saw Chota Master. I belonged to Chota Master. I don’t have a dad. I don’t have a Mom. 

You know, when I approached a chameleon yesterday, it closed its eyes. It reasoned that if it couldn’t see me, I couldn’t see it too. It was easy to catch him by the tail and slam him against the ground. The blood poured as orangy red. In fact, it could be that the chameleon offered himself to Chota Master though. That must be it since, chameleons are never easy to grasp. 

The devil. My God. Never ‘Kutty’ or ‘Chataan’. Always, ‘Kutty Chaatan’. When will I see him? I should send ten lakh rupees to Nandan tomorrow itself. He doesn’t ask but it’s my offering to Chota Master through him. 

When my first game, ‘The devilmaster,’ hit the stores, no one bought it. I was naturally depressed. But Chota Master intervened and the video game was, as you call it, a sleeper hit. Now, I have money but what’s the use? Chota Master doesn’t like luxury and I didn’t want him to hate me. I send money to the parents and they send it back. They didn’t know what I was. One day they will. 

“Did you get the doll?” Nandan’s voice had urgency. I held on tightly to the mobile. 

“Yes, it arrived yesterday.” 

“Anyone on the know?’ 

“No. It’s from an online business based out of Australia. I’ve already practiced a few times.” 

‘great.’ 

“I’ll transfer the money to you tomorrow,’ Said I, ‘the net is slow.’ 

“No, do it today itself,’ 

‘Definitely. I’ll add a bonus too..’ 

“All for him! Remember, he is the one. The omnipresent being.’ 

“All for him!’ I repeated. 

“Go as per my plan, okay?’ 

‘Sure. Would he ….’ 

“Of course, he’ll visit you immediately.  Be patient. Whenever you are ready, he will be too. All the best,” he cut the call. 

I clutched on to the mobile, drawing solace from the touch. When the times came, will I be brave enough to be counted as the disciple Chota Master? 

….. 

I touched the tip of the long dagger. My fingertip simmred red with blood, my Mother’s blood. It was all too easy. First my Dad and then my Mom. Both had a surprised look that was be their last emotion. I didn’t want to but had to do it. There is no reason, nor judgment.  They are free now, aren’t they? 

Dad? Mom?  Sister? Why are they smiling? Where is Choota master? 

# 

wrote: 

