From: Gowri N Kishore <gowri.n.kishore@gmail.com>
Date: Mon, 27 Aug 2018 at 19:49
Subject: Submission
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>

Bio: Hello, I am Gowri, a writer based in Bangalore. I've been writing for myself ever since I can remember and for others (as part of my day job) these past few years. I continue to write for myself at https:gowrink.wordpress.com. 

In the past, my works have appeared in Women's Web, The New Indian Express, Deccan Herald, Reading Hour, Campus Diaries, and The Youth Express. I was a winner of Elle Fiction Awards 2013. One of my short stories is part of 'Across the Ages', an anthology published by Pageturners and another is part of 'The Summer of the Cat', an e-book anthology by Random House India. 


First Time

She could not remember when she first noticed him standing at the bus stop. He was leaning against the wall of the shop in the corner, a leg folded back to rest against the peeling yellow paint.

Her cheeks flamed as she caught his eye. He was leering at her openly. Swiftly, she turned away, a sick feeling in the pit of her stomach. Why was the bus taking so long? On any other day, she would have missed it by this time.

When it finally came, she leapt in swiftly, fighting the urge to look out of the window to see if he was still there. Looking would only encourage him.

But he needed no encouragement. He was there the next day and the next and the one after that. He would always position himself somewhere behind her, but only after making sure that she’d seen him. The other girls stood around talking about assignments and weekend plans and she would stand there, her throat dry, their voices rising and falling around her.

So hard did she try not to look at him that she ended up looking at him again and again. And each time, he was looking right back. She’d regretted it immediately, but there had been a more powerful instinct that urged her, drove her to turn around. He never attempted to speak to her. He would just be there.

Back home, she would examine herself in the mirror, trying to see what he saw. Limp hair tied back. Large, anxious eyes. Arms covered in soft, downy hair (her mother would not let her have them waxed). An unremarkable figure. There were hundreds of girls like her in every city in the country. What was there to see?

One day, she was really frightened. The day she took out a green churidar with orange speckles from the cupboard but felt a strange reluctance to put it on. 

It’s too loose, a voice whispered. It will make you look shapeless, like a shirt hung off a hanger.

She had never before noticed what she was wearing. She would pick up anything that was washed and folded on the top of the pile in her cupboard, sometimes wearing the same five dresses again and again for weeks together. It was one of the things her mother scolded her about.

It frightened her that she cared today.

Was she trying to look nice because he would be there? She didn’t actually think that thought, but she knew it was there, lurking in the corners of her mind like a backstabbing friend trying not to catch your eye at school.

Resolutely, she put on the green churidar and walked to the bus stop. Let it be shapeless. Let it be ugly. Let her look like a flag on a stick. She thought triumphantly that because she looked less appealing than usual, he would be deprived of whatever pleasure he was getting from staring at her. But she was conscious of the looseness of her dress through the day.

She had a second fright a few days later. It was in class and Sangita was giggling about Arun from Mechanical who had given her a love letter. It was hilarious—apparently he had compared her to a moonbeam lighting up his night. “He’s just paraphrased that song from Neeyum Naanum. Couldn’t he have written something original?”

“You don’t like him?” she asked. 

“Chi, no” Sangita scoffed. 

All the girls laughed but only she noticed the blush that suffused Sangi’s face.

The talk then continued onto who liked who. Mallika and Bharat from their own class were an item - everyone knew that. But she had not realized that so many other girls were in love. 

Susheela and her athai’s son who was studying to be a doctor in Coimbatore had decided to get married. They wrote to each other every week, long letters full of news about the smallest of things and repeated declarations of affection. Susheela did not think her father or her aunt would object. “I think they know already but are not saying anything.”

Saira Banu confessed that she liked her neighbour. He was a journalist with an evening paper and kept odd hours. But every morning, she would wake up early and go up to the terrace, ostensibly to study, but really to exchange coy smiles and yearning glances across the parapet.

“Is he a Muslim?” she asked. 

Saira Banu looked annoyed and a little worried, “I don’t know - we have never spoken.”

“Aey, who cares. If you really love each other, you should run away to Madras and get married!” Chitra declared. She herself was safely engaged to a boy her parents had found through a marriage broker. He was a bank clerk at present but had written the officer test and was sure to clear it. Her father was waiting for the results to be declared so that he could print ‘Chi: Santosh Arulappan (MSc), Officer in Vijaya Bank’ on the invitation cards.

Nobody asked her if she liked anyone or if anyone had shown any interest in her. It wasn’t as if they were being superior or spiteful - it simply did not occur to them that she too might prove to be attractive to someone. Three times, she came close to crying out, “I have a lover too! He waits for me every day at the bus stop. It doesn’t matter if it is hot or raining. He is always there. He stays patiently till my bus comes and waves at me as it moves away. I pretend not to notice because what will people say? But he knows that I know and that is enough…”

But she bit back the words. It would be stupid. They would all look at her disbelievingly, perhaps even laugh. Quietly, she returned to her desk when the bell rang. But through the lecture, she doodled his name in the corner of her engineering graphics notebook.

What was his name? Mahantesh? Raghu? Sooraj?

What if it were something old-fashioned, like Muthuraman or Veeramani? What if he were a Christian or Muslim? She didn’t know which was worse. 

If he turned out to be a Christian or a Muslim, her father would throw her out of the house. Her mother would weep and bang her head on the pillar in the kitchen, lamenting how her well brought-up daughter had brought such shame on the family. Her little sister would be terrified but try to protect her from her father’s blows and console her. But she would stand up for herself. 

She would say with dignity, despite the tears running down her face, a purplish bruise blooming on her cheek where appa had slapped her. “Amma, appa - I love him and I will go with him wherever he calls. If we have your blessings, we will be happy. But if you won’t agree, then I will leave this house, this city, and never come back. I won’t bring you a bad name by living with him right here, in this place where everyone who knows you also lives.”

She was so caught up in her imagination that it was a shock to realize that she was still in the engineering graphics class. The substitute teacher was a terrified-looking girl only a few years their senior. She was gripping her notes as though they were a lifeline that if she let go, she would collapse. The backbenchers were making paper planes and sniggering pointedly at the teacher’s fumbling words. The girls in the front rows took notes studiously, underlining important words in green ink.

She had been in another world. She’d painted her face and gone out on stage and the spotlights had focused on her, lighting her up for the world to see. Her parents were among the audience, staring at her open mouthed. So was Lakshmi teacher who was always asking her to be smart and speak up. And Ravi maama, amma’s brother, who always told her parents that since she had no talents or good looks, she should write various tests and definitely get into a government job. “Otherwise, you will have difficulty marrying her off!”

But today, in front of them, she had stood up for herself. Shown them that she was worth something too. It was with a spring in her steps that she got back home. 

“Why are you so happy today?” amma asked her, rolling the dough for chapatis on the granite kitchen slab. Amma looked tired and worn out, her thin cotton saree tucked up out of the way. The single gold bangle was pushed far back on her forearm so that it wouldn’t roll back and forth as she rolled the chapatis. Impulsively, she kissed amma on the cheek.

“What is this new thing?” amma asked, not altogether displeased. 

“Chumma…” she said and went off to take a bath, humming. It was as though she were living inside a song—it went with her everywhere, a lilting backdrop that made everything seem exciting and full of possibilities.

When she was not at the bus stop, she could not visualize his face, recall those little details that make someone real. Like the little depressions of chicken pox marks. Or a cleft in the chin. Or eyebrows that joined in the middle. But then again, she’d never had a chance to really look at him. Two—perhaps three—snatched, guilt-ridden glances, that’s all she’d had.But all night, her dreams were confused and magical. There were flowering gardens and the warm sun on her back. A boat gliding silently down a river of winding silver in the dark. 

In the morning, she lay awake in bed, trying to recollect all that she had seen. Today, she thought, I will look at him. I want to know what he looks like. Is he tall or short. Fair or dark. What colour is his hair. When he smiles, is there a gap in his teeth… 

But I will not smile, she decided. That would not be right.

She went to the bus stop, dressed the same as always. In fact, she had put on her new red churidar with a dupatta that had little bells along the edges. She had put on her jimikkis and painstakingly drawn a large designer pottu on her forehead. But when Gayu came in and asked curiously, “Akka, is there any function in college today?” she was embarrassed.

She had taken it all off, even wiped off the pottu and put on her usual small maroon dot instead. When she went into the kitchen, Gayu was sitting on the kitchen slab, eating dosas off a plate in her hand. 

“Pack your lunch box—I’m just tempering the mustard seeds…” amma said.

“Akka was wearing that red churidar today,” Gayu remarked.

“Nonsense,” amma said before she could protest. “That is a new dress—for a special occasion.”

“Stupid!” she whacked Gayu on her head, grabbed her lunch box and fled. But was today an ordinary day after all? She wondered. Perhaps it was going to be a special occasion.

She arrived at the bus stop ten minutes earlier than usual, but he was already there, waiting. Through the corner of her eye, she sneaked glances at him. White shirt with the first couple of buttons open. Black thread around the neck with some kind of locket. Blue jeans. Shaven cheeks. Thin moustache. Bushy hair. Ears that stuck out.

He is no Ajith or Surya, she thought, repressing a mental giggle. But I like him. I like him!

With a start, she realized that he was coming towards her. Oh my god, is he going to speak to me?

“Hello.” His voice was soft, not too deep, like one that was not yet fully developed. But it was kind and a little shy.

“Hello,” she gulped.

“I have been meaning to talk to you for a long time”

“Yes” she breathed. Her ears seemed to be on fire. 

“Yes,” his courage seemed to grow in the face of her not-unfriendly reception. “Your friend - the fair one with two plaits? She comes some days and doesn’t on others?”

“Induja?”

“Oh,” he breathed, “Induja!” The name sounded like music when he said it. 

“Yes, that is the one. Can you-” he took a folded piece of paper from his pocket and held it out, “Can you give this to her?”

She would always remember that moment. 

Everything happened together. The bus pulled in. The sun went behind the clouds. A transistor radio suddenly started blaring out an old movie song. He stood in front of her, absurdly clear in her eyes, his expression a little hopeful, a trifle embarrassed.

“Yes,” she said, “I will give it to Induja.” 

Induja already had a boyfriend, but it didn’t matter. She didn’t want to tell him that. She didn’t want to see him again, ever. In a few days, he would find out for himself and stop coming to the bus stop. And then her life could go back to normal. Or whatever normal was now possible.

How good, she thought, putting the letter into her bag, that I didn’t wear the new churidar. That would have made everything unbearable.

*** 