From: Pravin Vemuri <pravinvemuri@gmail.com>
Date: Wed, 29 Aug 2018 at 14:37
Subject: Submission
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>


*THE CLOSURE* 

I open the door and the flush, tobacco-sweet air grabs at me with the distilled pleasure of a million little déjà vus and pulls me inside. The smoking room is small, grey and packed with twenty-something-year-olds passing a couple of cigarettes around. Not that I mind. Anything’s better than the main area of the resto-pub where they are playing oppressively loud music that I could barely comprehend but my team revels in before they decide to leave for the ‘after-party.’ They ask me if I would like to join them, but it doesn’t really sound like they want me around, *although*, they lend me their spare cigarettes before they leave, in case, I feel like smoking after all. 

I smile and nod at the twenty-something-year-olds, partly out of habit but mostly because I’m tipsy and circle over to the opposite corner to light up. *Tipsy* is a bit generous; I’m – let’s say – ‘comfortably numb’, the way you get if you are drinking after a long time. It’s a good feeling, a warm feeling and it has nothing to do with work. If I’m celebrating anything, it’s that our daughter recently graduated to *almost* sleeping through the night, which, given the year we’ve had, is worth getting drunk for. 

Aahana was born while we were still in California and for the first month, our parents were around. When they returned to India, our baby turned and stayed permanently colicky with no regular sleep schedule and resistant to every pacifying technique known to man. My wife and I, we barely slept. We’re always on the edge, often breaking out into helpless muted arguments (lest we woke her up). Nonetheless, when we were nearing the six-month mark, the realization that we would’ve to put our poor little colicky girl in day-care was heart-breaking. The alternative – my wife giving up her career – didn’t sit well with us either and was nearly unaffordable in USA. Atleast, in India, we could afford to hire a nanny. But finding jobs back home turned out to be a lot harder than we thought. Innumerable calls, prodding, pleading, calling in favours, then sleepless nights and more disagreements and more muted fights. Towards the end, things got so desperate that I caved and took the first thing that eventually came along (with a pay-cut and a lower title), and we moved back to Bangalore where we both used to work and where my wife’s folks had retired to. My last drink, then, was a large can of warm beer I’d downed the night before we moved – sitting alone on the living room floor, among the packed boxes, working through the inescapable anxieties of the move. 

It must have been the buzz then or probably because he was hidden by the door when I opened it, that I don’t notice Arunanshu until the youngsters exit, leaving just the two of us in the room. Aru has obviously seen me before I had, his eyes were already on me but if he’d been startled, there’s no sign of it. Am not quite startled myself. More like rudely awakened. *How else* are you supposed to react when you come across someone you’d nearly beaten the crap out of a couple of years ago? *I don’t know.* But the rush of blood feels inevitable. I’d imagined meeting him like this and had imagined the things I would say or do quite often in the beginning, but over time, it bothered me less and less to the point that he hadn’t crossed my mind for a while (except, maybe, during that week when the whole Harvey Weinstein thing blew up). But here he’s now, still so easily able to get a rise out of me. 

“*Hey*,” he says, “I had heard you were back.” 

He’s still pencil-thin, leaning against the opposite wall with his weight balanced on his shoulder blades, as if, the room couldn’t possess him, as if, no room in the world could possess him. He senses something’s amiss because he quickly straightens, brushes his over-grown hair back and asks, “How’s the little one?” 

“Good,” I say, “she’s doing good.” 

“I sent you a message when you guys announced on Facebook.” 

I don’t recall seeing his or, for that matter, anyone’s message. We’d received hundreds when we’d posted the news of Aahana’s birth. 

“Thank you,” I say and pull on the cigarette. 

He purses his lips, tilts his head and looks out of the glass partition in the door. “Fancy meeting at a place this, huh?” he says, from the corner of his mouth. 

“I don’t know if I will call it fancy.” 

He smiles and turns to look at me. “I guess I meant ironic. *No, *that doesn’t sound right either.” 

“How about cliched?” 

Aru laughs. “Now that’s funny,” he says and laughs again. The music that’s playing in the main area seeps in through the walls and although, it’s not as loud or oppressive as it’s outside, it forces us to speak loudly, which, *ironically*, helps me calm down somewhat. 

“You know, what’s really funny though?” he says, and looks out the glass partition again, “My Tinder date just up and left. Apparently am too *intense!*” He scoffs and then, after a pause, he turns and says matter-of-factly, “FYI. Pooja and I are no longer together.” 

I nod. Earnestly. He sighs, shrugs and lights another cigarette and we fall silent for a bit, until, something occurs to Aru and he looks up with a lopsided smile but before he can say anything, the door opens and a woman, a girl really, walks in talking animatedly on her phone and we both turn to watch her walk to the end of the room struggling to balance her phone and her cigarettes. Aru turns towards me with his eyebrows raised. I shrug and we both reach for our phones. 

Two years ago, Aru had taken Binoy and Mithali (the two new guys he had added to the team that I had left him in charge of, before I moved to California) to a pub much like this one for new year’s. Why only the two of them? Because they were new, he told them, and he wanted some exclusive ‘bonding time.’ There was unlimited alcohol on offer and soon they were all completely hammered. At one point in time, Aru came around, sat alongside Mithali and put his arm around her. Binoy was sitting at the other end of the table, lost in his world as he later recounted. Sometime after that – Binoy couldn’t say how long – Aru got up and excused himself to go to the men’s room and as soon as he left, Mithali began to cry. Uncontrollably. Binoy, now suddenly alert and panicked, came around to comfort her and to ask what had happened but she was, quite drunk herself, inconsolable and just kept crying. When Aru returned, Binoy – now sitting alongside Mithali – asked Aru to leave and as one would expect, things got heated and they got into a scuffle, only to be separated by the waiting staff who threw Aru out and put the other two in a cab. 

The next day Aru called them both and since he was still their boss, they took his call and he threatened to fire them if any of what happened came out, which, only scared them into calling me and the following morning, as directed by my management (who were, at that time, reeling from a rash of sexual harassment cases across the company), I was on a flight to India to confer with the local HR and constitute a panel to investigate the ‘matter’. 

Word got back, however, and when I walked into office, HR informed me that Aru was resigning. Let’s talk to him, I said, and it took two hours when we finally got him into a room. Aru declined to sit and instead stood next to the door with his arms crossed at his chest. “Look, am done, one way or the other. Even if it comes out that I didn’t do anything wrong and it *will*, if you guys investigate properly, my career at this company is over. It only takes a complaint.” 

I was *pissed*. As was HR. I remember wishing we were in a parking lot rather than that conference room. *But* his logic was sound. We didn’t argue against it. 

When the girl finishes her cigarette and leaves the room, still chattering away on her phone, Aru raises his eyebrows once more and because I am now curious, I ask, “What happened between you and Pooja?” 

Aru scratches his temple. “Well, *you know*” he says and clears his throat “whatever happens to people who’ve been together for too long. We grew apart. Things were already hard after the miscarriage – you remember that, right? Then after I resigned, I was out of a job for a bit and after about six months, we didn’t have enough to make the rent and that was it. She left, and I moved into a PG. It was tough, but things had gotten so bad between us towards the end that ending things was the only choice we had. PG was tough too, man. It took some ‘adjusting’ but, *hey*, I was single again, no responsibilities. Have you ever been in one of those things? *No?* It’s like being in college again. There’s a constant noise, cacophony actually, *all the time*. No personal space. But, you feel so free. Unfettered. Scared of the big bad world one day but then not giving a crap the other, you know what I mean?” 

“*No*,” I say, “Not anymore” 

Aru laughs, and it sounds – for a change – genuine and I have this flash: me and Aru driving back from the campus of his alma mater from where I’d hired him and then spent an enormous amount of time grooming him. We’ve had a good day, had interviewed several great students and are feeling really quite upbeat and then Aru turns and asks, mock-self-deprecatingly, if I’d spoken to anyone as good as him. I say no. I say, that would be nearly impossible. I saw that sincerely because it was true. Later, in the evening we toast our day at the pub next to office and he throws up in my car. 

“It’s not like I didn’t have opportunities,” he says now, “I had been to three interviews right after I resigned. And they liked me, I mean, *really* liked me. Then, after a couple of weeks, nothing. When I followed up, they said ‘sorry the position is closed’ or ‘we haven’t decided yet’ or some such crap. For a while, I thought, maybe they got in touch with you and you told them to not take me in.” 

“Me?” 

“Yeah, for a while I thought that. *I know*, I know, that’s below you and they wouldn’t have known about you unless I told them. And I *didn’t*. But I figured it out. It’s a small industry – close-knit. Who would the HR folks you interview with talk to? HR folks at your *previous* employer. And those guys just shat all over me, man. No, seriously, *they did*! And why wouldn’t they? I hated their guts when we worked alongside, and they hated me back. Don’t get me wrong, I was seriously pissed but then I had this epiphany – you know – that this corporate rat race is not for me. It was like the thick veil of Maya had been lifted. I’d long been plagued by this sense of purposelessness and now, at my lowest point, it all fell in place. *Sorry*, am rambling. Do you want another cigarette? You want one of mine?” 

“*No.* Am good.” 

“*Ok*,” he says and lights another cigarette. “I read somewhere that when you are seeking a higher truth, someone will come along to guide you. Sort of what happened to me. I met this chap, this amazing ‘dude’, ex-IIT, IIM – been there and done that, started companies, sold them, did that a few times over until he burnt out. So, one day, he decides he’s done with that and it’s time to give back to the world. Comes back to India with one simple idea: if you supply good quality power to as many people as you can, you set them free. Once you have power, you can connect to the internet, cook food faster etc., etc. It liberates people, you know. Simple idea, right? Tremendous ROI. Now we go all over the country, we help people with solar or biodiesel. It’s sounds serious but it’s actually fun! You get to meet real people and help them. And he’s good at that, so patient, so generous. *Amazing*, amazing guy. Best boss I’ve ever had. And it’s all *so* fulfilling. I’ve really felt more fulfilled.” He pauses for a drag and then says, “You don’t know what you are missing out when you are doing that shitty planet-destroying work of some money-hungry capitalists, you know?” 

And *there* it is. The malignant vanity, the cheaply acquired arrogance. 

“What happened?” he says, and I realize I’ve been shaking my head. 

“Something just occurred to me,” I say and cross my hands at my chest, “Did you ever get around to apologizing? To either Binoy or Mithali?” 

Almost instantly his face darkens, and he frowns through his answer: “I didn’t do *anything* wrong. And I still paid my dues as if I had.” 

“You threatened to *fire* them! Do you know they quit soon after? Always happens. The abused always leave.” 

He shakes his head. “You speak as if you were there! I wasn’t going to *fire* them. I couldn’t fire them even if I wanted to, could I? We had all these ‘rules’ and ‘processes,’ for God’s sake!” 

“*O.K. *Wow! So, let me understand this correctly. In your *great* philosophical awakening or whatever you call it, it never appealed to you to right a wrong? You couldn’t find it in your heart to give those guys some closure?” 

Aru takes a step in front. Then another. He looks flushed. He tries to smile but it comes off as a smirk. He puts his hands up “*What?* What do you mean by that? What gives *you* the moral superiority, huh?” he says, “How many people have you laid off over the years? Did you ever apologize to them? In fact, what did you keep telling us? ‘Never *apologize*, don’t personalize. Keep it short?’” 

“Yes,” I say, “Because a layoff is not the same thing. It’s about costs. And *most importantly*, I didn’t molest any of those people.” 

“I *didn’t fucking molest* anyone!” 

“Well, too bad everyone we know thinks so. And I mean *everyone.*” 

He takes another step forward and now, we are inches apart. I can smell the alcohol on his breath as I’m sure, he can on mine. I can almost feel his pulse, feel his eyes spread wide, and hear him breath heavy against my chest. I lean in and speak slowly and clearly. “Don’t start something you don’t know how to end.” 

He looks up and blinks. Once. Twice. Then slowly and deliberately steps back and turns around. Then, for reasons I cannot fathom (even in hindsight), he turns around sharply, and my reflexes take over. I land a hard half-punch-half-slap on the side of his face which has a loud report even with the music. Aru yelps, recoils and balances himself against the wall. It takes him a moment to recover and when he looks back up, his hand is clasped tightly across his cheek and his eyes are shot wide in horror. And then, with impeccable timing, the door opens, and the twenty-somethings return, streaming in between us, around us, chattering, laughing, slapping each other’s backs. Maybe they notice us, maybe they don’t. My eyes are locked onto him and he stares back: still in shock, still horror-stricken. The kids light up, the smoke fills the room and since there is nothing else to be said or done, I open the door and leave. 

*BIO: Pravin has been published previously in Out of Print, Earthern Lamp and Spark magazines. He is based in Bangalore* 

Thank you, Pravin 