From: Harmanjit Mavi <harmanjitmavi@gmail.com>
Date: Mon, 3 Sep 2018 at 22:16
Subject: Submission
To: The Editors <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>

Bio: I grew up in a Sikh family in Punjab, India, forty years after partition. Notwithstanding the passage of time, I grew up hearing stories about the bloodshed that occurred on the other side of the border. There was little talk about what happened on our side of the border. There wasn't much introspection about what our grandfathers' generation did to those who were once their neighbors. The prevailing sentiment was still blame, rather than guilt. With the story below, written from the perpetrator's (rather than the victim's) point of view, I am hoping to shock a few consciences into better soul searching. Please let me know if you would like to publish it. Regards, Harmanjit Mavi 155 Tufnell Drive, Winnipeg, MB, R2N 1J7, Canada 1-204-881-6913 harmanjitmavi@gmail.com 

*The Severed Fingers* 

My *kirpan* severed three fingers from the child's right hand; he had raised it to shield himself. Blood spurted, onto the maize fields, from each of his amputated fingers and drifted westward. The boy writhed on the ground, clutching his maimed hand, sobbing, and screaming. I approached him, once again, with my *kirpan*. His mother grasped my legs and begged "for god's sake, let him live." I kicked her away. I grabbed the child's neck and sliced off his throat in a stroke. He was dead. 

The child’s blood stained my hands. His mother perched over his corpse, speechless. Tara Singh claimed her now docile flesh and dragged it into the bushes… 

Blood dyed the ground beneath our feet red. No man, who had been traveling in the caravan westward, remained alive. A cry rose from the crowd, " raj karega khalsa, aaki rahe na koye! (the faithful shall rule and no enemy shall remain!).” I chanted along fervently, thinking of the atrocities that had occurred across the new border in Lahore, Rawalpindi, and Multan: Sikhs who had lost their homes, hopes, and honour; Sikhs who were doused with gasoline and burned to death; Sikhs who were bled to death, in the *halal *manner; Sikh men whose beards were sheared before they were butchered; Sikh women who had slit their wrists or jumped into wells to avoid getting raped…  We had claimed our revenge. 

We returned to the village, reciting a repetitive chorus: “bole so nihaal, sat shri akal (whoever chants the name of God, finds salvation).” As we made our way past the rivulet towards the railway tracks, the red flowers of the *dhak* tree beside the path flashed like fire in the torchlight. 

At the threshold of my home, I could hear my wife, Poro, screaming. She was lying on the *charpoy*. The midwife told me that she had gone into labour just before dusk. She had been preparing for the delivery: boiling water on the *chulha* and gathering clean towels, alcohol for sterilization, a knife to cut the umbilical cord, and strings of cotton cloth to clamp it... 

As I moved closer, I saw the child’s cranial hair peak through Poro’s vulva. “Just a couple more pushes, Poro” urged the midwife as she dipped a towel in hot water and cleaned around the area feeling the child’s head. Poro seemed exhausted but, after a moment, resumed her struggle. The child’s head appeared out of her body shortly thereafter and the midwife gently moved it. Then, the child’s shoulders appeared followed by the torso and the legs. The midwife briskly cleaned the child’s mouth and nose and, to our relief, the child cried as breath filled his lungs for the first time. Next, the midwife tied two short pieces of cotton cloth to the umbilical cord and cut in the middle, physically separating Poro and the child. 

The child was smeared with blood. I dipped a towel in hot water and began to clean him thoroughly. He had such a lush head of hair, along with broad shoulders and a chest full of pride. Then, I looked at his hands. His left hand was perfect: four fingers and a thumb. But, his right hand was missing three fingers as if they had been sliced off by some butcher. Poro saw the child’s right hand and recoiled. With a plaintive look at me, she cried “What *karma*, what sin is God punishing us for?” 