From: sartaj ghuman <batalaland@gmail.com>
Date: Mon, 3 Sep 2018 at 20:55
Subject: submission
To: <outofprintmagazine@gmail.com>

Bio: I eke out a living freelancing as a wildlife biologist/ artist/ writer based out of India. Here's a short story about the tension that arises when poverty comes up against possession, called Osmosis. 

*Osmosis* 

It had to be in the summer. The winter in Delhi draws people inwards, makes them shut their doors and windows if they have any and makes them hunch down on the pavements if they don’t, holding their meager blankets around them tighter. Winter cannot fertilize a revolt. Why, it wouldn’t even let rice left out all night go bad! It had to be summer: the fecund season of fervent ferment. 

It had to be the summer that draws people, tired after a hard day’s work and yet unable to sleep, restless and sweaty, out into the streets, fanning themselves with their shirts in their hands. It had to be the summer that lets the rickshaw-puller – with sweat dripping from his scalp, across his temples and into his eyes – see for the first time the man sitting in the plush back-seat of his air-conditioned Mercedes. It had to be the summer when the construction worker on his way to eat his lunch under the shade of a tree pauses before the full-glass façade of a building; and as he watches the people inside – cooled even in their suits and ties by the air-conditioning that only throws out hot air for him – feels his hand tighten around the handle of his pick-axe. It had to be the summer that would nurture discontent; like milk wrapped up in a warm blanket, set to curd. 

And yes, I called it a revolt. Do you find that notion revolting? What would you rather call it, a riot? A mutiny? Déjà vu? For isn’t one man’s mutiny another man’s revolt? I would think the re-dedicated Mutiny Memorial on the ridge was evidence enough of that. 

*By the time Delhi was finally retaken, in September 1857, the sentiments of the residents, had turned against the rebelling soldiers – the tilangas, the outsiders, the supposed liberators who had taken to marauding. And when Mirza Ghalib – like all the other residents who had lived through the rebellion, the siege and the taking back of Delhi – was brought before the tribunal and asked where his allegiance lay, with the British, of course, he said. * 

*Then why didn’t you come fight besides us? he was asked.* 

*I am not a martial man, said Ghalib. Being a man of letters and of rather weak health and a frail disposition, the best I could’ve done was pray for you; and that I could do very well from my humble dwellings. * 

We were all caught unawares, looking the wrong way. It wasn’t like we were cheering for the wrong side - more like we were all cheering at the wrong courts. While we kept talking and writing and arguing on and on about Left vs Right, Hindutva vs Liberal, Establishment vs Maoist, what should blindside us on an idle Tuesday afternoon but the most basic, the most eternal of all known divides: Poor vs Rich. 

What happened over those three days in the National Capital Region wasn’t beyond our wildest imaginations or our deepest fears, no - it was exactly what our wildest imagination and our deepest fears are made of. The poor took to the street, or shall we say they took over the streets; and then they took whatever else they wanted. They unlatched the gates, broke down the walls, tore down the fences and came across to our side, the side where the wealth was accumulated. The reprisal was obviously decisive, and as we’ve come to expect from our government, extremely exaggerated. And as a result, the rich and the powerful have managed to restore law and order – restore status quo: the pervasive, current, reigning power structure. But don’t let them fool you even for an instant into believing that this latest round of violence that the capital witnessed was prompted by anything other than poverty. It wasn’t this or that ideological indoctrination; it wasn’t any foreign powers trying to destabilize us; no underground groups whose ultimate purpose they managed to thwart. No, it was just normal, poor, disgruntled people who had had enough. And, of course, the summer - the summer that baked their resentment until it rose like leavened bread – the crust cracking from too much baking powder, maybe? 

Why do I know this? Because the very first scenes of violence that I saw gave me a sharp sense of Déjà vu – I don’t believe in premonition, no. But I knew that I was experiencing emotions that I had experienced before. And like an avid bird-watcher will never forget the place, the circumstances, the exact moment when he sees a new bird for the first time (a ‘lifer’, they call it), so was I taken back to the exact moment that I first felt this curious mix of emotions. 

*Something there is that doesn’t love a wall,* *in all of us. And yet day after day, trains ply in which more people are packed into the three coaches towards the end, next to the luggage and brake van, than there are in all the rest of the dozen or so coaches. They cover every inch of the floor when they spread out their tired bodies to sleep at night, one forehead against another shin, yang fitting neatly into yin; bony shoulder blades and brittle backs pinched against the hard ribs of the luggage racks. But never do they spill out of the metal walls of their coaches into the adjoining ones. Something there must be that respects wall too, in all of us, something that defers to laws, abides by boundaries, complies to order, yields to borders, however unjust they may be.* 

That was about ten years ago. I’d been working as a beat journalist for about a year then and used to live in Noida, where most of the publishing houses were based. So when the call came in about the desecration of an Ambedkar statue nearby, I was there within minutes. This was yet another in a spate of such incidents in western Uttar Pradesh and there was considerable tension in the area. I got there early - before they covered the statue up; before people from nearby towns, villages and the capital itself had begun to gather there and stage a protest; before the police got there in force to control the mob and brought a metal statue to replace the vandalized one. They’d realized that cast metal statues are harder to break. 

The statue’s face had been blackened and the right hand broken at the shoulder and crudely tied to its waist. There he stood, one-handed, staring calmly from behind empty spectacle frames, with a smug academic look. He had a book under his left hand and a massive phallus with the index finger outstretched pointing straight ahead. On the side of the pedestal were scrawled, in Hindi, words in the same black paint that had been used to blacken his face: “Bharat Mata ki Choot”. The ubiquitous slogan of Praise – or  Victory – to Mother India (Bharat Mata ki Jai), mangled into Mother India’s Cunt. 

The message was clear: whoever had done this believed that, unless stopped, the Ambedkarites would fuck India up. 

That place – now probably in the center of the urban sprawl that is Noida – was then at the growing edge. The city was growing madly, erratically about the edges, engulfing villages and agricultural fields like an acid spill and this was its bubbling, hissing fringe. This was where the city met the villages: where buffaloes herded by old men with stout sticks roamed the streets. This was where cheap accommodation brought the newly migrated IT workers and where the pubs attracted the village youth on their brand new Royal Enfields bought with the money from the latest land deals. This was the promised new India of quick-rising skyscrapers on unfinished roads, all hand-made by an uprooted mass of dispossessed men and women. It was little more than a wilderness where turbulent lives intersected in a desolate, dusty mess of jumbled iron t-bars sticking out of freshly set concrete. 

The statue stood at a T-junction, next to a couple of empty plots overgrown with weeds. There were low shanties against the boundary walls and the empty plots were being used as open lavatories. My report says I that talked to couple of people on the spot, to the local SP, and to some of the residents. I have no recollection of any of that. 

What I remember clearly, however, is that while looking for residents to interview I went into one of the houses right opposite the shanties. It had a wrought iron gate and a paved drive-way that led to the garage at the end, with the main door to one side. The small lawn in front had a few tree saplings planted around and a hedge along the front wall that was yet to come up. 

The house had an unfinished look as well, in spite of – or maybe because of – a fresh coat of paint, spotlessly clean windows and the newly varnished front door. The moment that door opened, a dog slipped past me and went straight out the gate that I had left unlatched. It was a young Labrador not more than six months old, and as I stood aside, out went the maid after it, shouting Scijer Scijer. Embarrassed, I apologized to the woman who stood before me, her wet hair wrapped up in a towel. She must’ve expected me to be the cable guy, or the electrician or something and was even more annoyed when I turned out to be just a useless journalist. I know nothing about it, she said and almost shut the door. Then on second thought she asked if I wanted water and asked me to come in. I was given a glass of water and left alone while she went into the other room and I heard the noise of a hair-dryer. 

As I stood at the large tempered-glass French window, looking out, the maid came back with Scijar on a leash, the end of which she was using to whack him. She was thin and dark, lithe. Maybe it was the sari, or her earrings and the nose stud, but something gave her away as being an outsider. A drop in the sea of migrants who wash over the country in waves, spending months, years, away from their homes, amongst strangers, half-way across a sub-continent. How much salary would Proudhon say was commensurate for such work? 

She put him inside the gate, latched it, and let him off the leash. He promptly came to the doorstep and peed a large yellow pool and I realized that Scijar was a girl. The maid cursed her, got a newspaper from the garage, spread it out and let it soak in the pee, then crumpled it up, took it away and came back with a mop. 

Just as she started mopping, Scijar, sitting beside the gate gave a sharp bark and both of us looked up with a start. Just outside the gate stood two young boys with a black dog. They couldn’t have been more than 9 or 10 years old. The taller of the two had dusty brown hair, the shorter one was bald with what looked like patches of scabies on his scalp and his face; the black dog had a red handkerchief around its neck.  Scijar and the black dog clearly seemed to be friends, greeting each other with wagging tails and crouched invitations to play. 

They stood there a moment and then the shorter boy, with the innocent irreverence of moving aside an obstacle in his path, unlatched and opened the gate, letting the black dog in. I put the glass down and went to the door. 

You can’t come in, the maid was saying, walking up to the gate. 

“And who’s to stop us?” said the older boy, in a thick local accent that that made the maid stop in her tracks. Why, it even made my nape bristle, set my whole scalp tingling. “ And who’s to stop us?” 

She stood still, only slightly taller than them, while Scijer and the black dog chased each other around her legs.  I stepped outside and, avoiding the boys’ gaze, did the only thing I could think of doing: grab Scijer by the collar. The boys noticed me for the first time. Then they slowly turned and started walking away. One of them whistled a short sharp whistle, the other loudly shouted *ae* *randi*, you whore. The black dog ran out the gate. The maid stood rooted to the ground. 

Then the door behind me opened and the woman was standing there. “Shut the gate. Caesar will run out again”, she said and the maid came to life with a start. 

“Ji maem saab”, she said. Yes madam sir. 

*The principle of osmosis is this: molecules of a solvent tend to pass through a semipermeable membrane from a less concentrated solution into a more concentrated one. It means simply that water will pass through a semipermeable membrane into a sugar solution on the other side. You can think of this as a bid to equalize the concentration of sugar on the two sides. What if you wanted the water to stop moving? The simplest way would be to add sugar to it, to match the concentration of the solution across the membrane. But what if you wanted to keep all the sugar on one side? In fact, what if you wanted to add any more sugar that you managed to obtain also only to the sugar solution? Then the only way would be to make the barrier more and more impermeable.  * 

*As it turns out, membranes can never be made completely impermeable, and our attempts only make them more brittle. So they manage to keep the water out for a long time, right until they eventually snap. And all that while, as the water begins to push against the membrane and the tension is slowly increasing, each little drop of water is thinking, in thick local accent, “And who’s to stop us?”* 

…………………………………………………………………………………… 