From: Gatha Sonawane<gatha1.sonawane@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: The Darkness of Mind
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

On that day Vihar was very happy,he was going to be a father after all. His joy knew no bounds.Vihar and Neha were happily married and was mad about each other. Vihar was very happy as Neha was expecting, he went to his parent bedroom and said very excitingly “congratulation mom you gonna be daadi soon. Dad your grandchild is coming soon to play with you” Vihar’s parents were also happy at that time to hear this his mother congratulated Vihar and Neha and said “We were dying to see our grandchild’s face, finally with the grace of God our wish will be fulfilled before going to heaven, by tomorrow only we’ll go to Baba to seek their blessings, so that no problem will come in Neha’s pregnancy”. When Neha heard this her happiness turned into disappointment she whispered into Vihar’s ear “not again” Vihar just smiled at her and told her “it’s OK you don’t have to do anything. You just go with mom and take blessing and anyways it is not wrong to take blessings of elders. Neha was in good mood so she didn’t argued with anyone and she made her mind quickly.

Vihar was born and brought in the environment full of poojas, havan, offerings, fasting, muhurat, baba’s, Godman, superstitions and other blindfaiths. Though Vihar was not very religious but he never used to say no to anything but, Neha was very different she was clear about her views and more over she was a pure atheist. Many times she asked Vihar “Why don’t you tell your parents to stop following this blindfaiths they are mere superstition they won’t get anything by doing this” and every time she get the same reply from Vihar “I can ask them but they are very emotional and don’t want to disrespect or hurt their feelings by arguing with them” Vihar parents also keep on asking Neha to follow all the beliefs they have may it be their wrong notion, but it has to be followed as they fear God and don’t want to face anything bad by not following this. Sometimes they emotionally blackmail her to do this for Vihar’s good and when this doesn’t works she was forced to do so. She kept mum for many times as she thought their mentality will change with time and also she didn’t want to hurt Vihar by behaving bad with her in-laws. Vihar was knowing all this but he kept ignoring the things and always took this thing jokingly.

Vihar always wanted a little princess,he used to say a girl can always be a good child then a boy, she can love you like no one else. Next day Vihar took half day leave from his office he went for shopping he buyed many toys- teddy, cars, dolls, trains, tweety, duck and what not? After shopping Vihar went straight to home he wanted to surprise Neha. He knock the door. Always Neha used to open the door so, he hide behind the door but he couldn’t hear the mesmerizing sound of Neha’s anklet that’s why he came out to find his mother standing on door instead of Neha. Vihar entered the house his father was sitting on the rocking chair which was his favourite place to sit while having a tea. While removing his shoes Vihar fell a silence in the house. The atmosphere was different than the other days and moreover Neha didn’t come to see him till now.

Vihar asked his mother “Where is Neha?” His mother replied “In her room”. On that Vihar said “Ok mom please keep tea for me” and with a great excitement he went in their bedroom to see Neha .He called her many times before entering but there was no reply from her side. The bedroom door was not locked but it was closed Vihar pushed the door slowly as he thought she must be sleeping but, when he went inside the bedroom.He found that Neha was not on bed, Vihar called “Where are you my baby’s mother, look what I brought for our baby” He was searching her all over, then he thought she must be in washroom as the door was half closed.Vihar was in good mood he kept on speaking from outside “Neha come out honey, you won’t believe I did shopping for our baby I brought so many stuffs and yes !this is my choice. You always used to tell me that my choice is bad but today I” ll prove you wrong. Come and see” Vihar waited for a while but there was no answer from Neha so he knock the doors few times and then pushed the door.Vihar was shocked to see Neha lying on the floor in unconscious state. He yelled “Neha” he took her on the bed and tried to wake her. His mother and father hear the yelling of Vihar and came inside to see what happened. They took Neha to doctor who was handling her case. After checkup doctor called Vihar inside her cabin Vihar was much tensed for Neha and for his baby. He didn’t understand what could have happened to her, when he left for office Neha was doing good.Vihar remembered the smile on her face while she was seeing off him. Vihar’s mind was crowded with many thoughts as doctor entered in the cabin. Doctor’s expression was enough for Vihar to assumed that something is wrong.Vihar asked doctor “What happened to her doctor? She was very OK till morning, Hows she now? And what about the baby?” Doctor asked Vihar to relaxed and said “Vihar, Neha is fine but..” Vihar curiously asked doctor “but what doctor?” doctor replied “I don’t want to say this but I have to say this Vihar, Neha had a abortion..She is not bearing your child anymore.” Vihar became very hyper and asked doctor “doctor are you joking with me , please don’t do this I mean this is not possible” Doctor said very politely “I wish I was joking, but I am not you have to believe this your baby is no more” Vihar couldn’t believe his ears he don’t know what to say he was speechless. Tears started coming from his eyes. He was filled with many thoughts he was thinking of Neha, the dreams which saw together, the feelings they shared when they knew that Neha was pregnant, their small fights while deciding their baby’s name, the toys they buyed many memories were crowding his mind. He was in deep sorrow and confusion he was thinking what must have happened? Neha was very happy with her pregnancy then why would she abort their child without telling Vihar? With all this thoughts he left the doctors cabin. His parents were sitting on the bench. Vihar hugged his mother and broke down in her arm. While crying he started telling his parents about the abortion. His mother tried to make him understand “It’s ok Vihar everything happens for our good. Have faith in God. He must have done this for any good reason and don’t worry she can be pregnant again. Not a big deal”. By hearing this Vihar suddenly struck by a thought he realized his parents are very normal during this incident. They are nor shocked neither surprised about the abortion. Now he started remembering the expression of her mother when he came home he was confused, he asked to himself why they are behaving like nothing has happened and then suddenly he realized that today his mother took Neha to ashram to seek blessings of baba. He doubt, is something happened in ashram? Vihar pushed his mother and asked “Mom today you took Neha to ashram, what happened there? Did baba asked Neha to abort our child? Is baba responsible for this?” his mother kept quiet, then Vihar asked again “Mom answer me I am asking you something. Mom tell me what happened? Mom I want to know. Answer me I said.”he yelled. Vihar’s mom who kept quiet about this incidence till now have to tell this to Vihar now, she screamed “believe me son he was not ours he was cursed. Your baby was bringing you death, and I love you Vihar I don’t want you to die an untimely death” and then she narrated the whole incidence to Vihar.

Neha and her mother-in-law went to meet baba. Neha touched babas feet and sat before him and his mother-in-law told baba that Neha is expecting, baba read something in his book which he always carry in his bag, he became very hyper like always and in his usual style started telling her mother-in-law that Neha should not bear this baby as this baby is cursed and after his birth Vihar will face an untimely death and if she wants her son to live then the baby should die as soon as possible. Neha was shocked to hear this she was definitely not expecting this. Her mother-in-law was very scared and she said she can do anything to save her family and her son and asked baba for help. Baba made a concoction and asked Neha to consume it so that the baby can be aborted and the cursed can be undone. Neha was very scared as her mother-in-law was also supporting baba and wanted to kill the baby. Neha tried to run from ashram. She resisted. She tried to convince her mother-in-law to stop this. She took all the efforts to release herself from the grip of babas disciples. She asked for help,but no one came. She did all the things she can but she failed before the blindfaith of these orthodox people and the concoction was forcefully poured into her mouth. Neha broke down she felled on ground she was so much scared by this incident she started yelling. She was thinking of Vihar, kissing of Vihar on her womb, expressions of Vihar when she told him that she is pregnant, her feeling of bearing a life in her womb, the dreams they saw together for their child, the name they decided for their little angle and many more. Neha was speechless she just kept crying she couldn’t believed what happened to her.

Now when Vihar knew this he was filled with anger. His eyes turned red and he was shivering by the thought what happened with her wife and his baby. He said “Mom you have no idea what you did, you killed our baby because of your blindfaith. A baby brings new life mom not a death. He was my child your grandchild. You have not only killed your grandchild but also your son your daughter-in-law and their dreams. Neha always told me to say no to your blindfaiths. I should have disagreed with your superstitions and blindfaith, but it was me who took this matter very lightly I never knew this would take toll on our lives. I don’t want to hurt your feelings by saying no to you but I never knew by doing this I am boosting your blindfaith. Today I learned you should dissent a wrong thoughts… 

