From: Sudha Nair<sudhagn513@gmail.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Ungrateful
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

We celebrate my husband’s retirement by going to Arijit Singh’s music concert in Phoenix City. Our son booked the tickets and the limo online. Madan comes home early after his send-off party and we drive together to Whitefield. I wear a pink crepe silk sari with a gold border. Madan is dressed in his formal office attire, not in a kurta as I would’ve liked.

‘New talent,’ Madan says, beaming and nodding his head to Arijit’s sensuous vocal rendition, clearly enjoying the show.

‘Beginning of a new life,’ he claims, on the way back.

I smile, happy for my husband’s retirement and our son’s gift of celebration.

My morning-walk gang dissolves abruptly. My timings have changed, not theirs.

A new beginning, indeed! The TV comes on at five in the morning, followed by the bathroom light, the loud flush and the noisy brushing. At five-thirty, the Yoga mat laid out, Madan follows the Yoga instructor on the channel meticulously in the converted bedroom. I stir, wishing he would stay in bed longer. What’s the need to wake up so early?

My sleep flies out of the window at the opening loud sound of Aum. ‘Today we will do a hundred and one kapaalbhaatis, twelve anulom-viloms, and twenty-four surya namaskars,’ the TV instructor announces.

I pull myself out of bed, shuffle to the kitchen to start the filter coffee then go back to pull on my sweatpants and shirt. If I hurry I’ll still get three quarters of an hour. Just in time to get the idlis on the steamer and the chutney ready for our breakfast after I return.

I see a woman in the park as I walk. She’s seated on a bench with a newspaper, and a poodle on her lap. I don’t notice the white ball at first until it barks when I pass by. I jump, alarmed. ‘She’s harmless,’ the woman says, ‘and I’m Devika.’

I give her a weak smile. ‘I’m Indu.’ I carry on. I take a wider curve to avoid the poodle, holding my breath on my next round. Devika smiles. The poodle doesn’t move. I breathe out.

They are at the same spot every morning. The poodle seems harmless. I warm up to their sight. ‘What’s her name,’ I ask, stopping by, knowing I’ll have to cut short one round to make up for the lost time.

‘Melanie,’ Devika says, putting down her Hindu.

Devika turns out to be single and the ex-editor of a women’s magazine.

I’ve done my Masters in Literature, but never held a job, I tell her.

‘That’s too bad,’ she says, in a matter-of-fact manner.

When Madan worked for the LIC, he had to leave by 9.30 for which he woke up by 7.30. I crave those times.

‘We have to go to the Dentist tomorrow,’ he says, at breakfast.

Why include me by default? I wish I could stay and have the house to myself instead. I try to wriggle out of it, but he insists. ‘Come on, what are you busy with anyway?’

‘Nothing.’

‘Then why not come along?’

I miss my walk that morning to finish cooking so that lunch is ready when we return. I idle in the waiting room while he gets his root canal. Sitting there, staring at the walls and twiddling my thumbs, I wish I’d carried a book along.

Devika and I become early morning regulars at the park. One day I let slip to Devika how my life has changed since Madan retired.

‘You put up with this crap every morning?’ she asks me, surprised.

It sounds strange when she puts it that way. Although I do miss my peaceful mornings and the house all to myself when he used to be at work, I do think he’ll settle down and relax his retirement routine eventually. ‘It takes getting used to this new life, I guess. Besides, I’m grateful it’s not all that bad,’ I tell her, laughing it off.

‘If a man does what he wants to, it’s because he can, but if a woman wants some peace, she is ungrateful?’ Devika says, with air-quotes at the end of her sentence. ‘Does that make any sense?’

I wish I’d never brought it up.

I know my life has changed too. I step out of the house only with Madan now, or to buy vegetables from the vendor across the street. It strikes me I haven’t gone out with my friends in a while.

I seem to be busier at home now than before. But these are no earth-shattering changes.

I shrug Devika’s words off.

But as I walk back home, I can’t help thinking of the time I’d told Madan about the new sarees my friends bought on one of their shopping trips without me. ‘You don’t have to get everything your friends get,’ he’d said.

What’s the big deal? I tell myself. I don’t care too much for sarees anyway.

On Sunday evenings Madan’s buddies come over for a game of cards. Another new routine, except this works in my favour. I prepare the filter coffee and snacks for them and slip away, happy to meet Devika in the park. A couple of hours bent over the cryptic crossword, we keep up our women talk on the side.

My house help quits a few months later. ‘Saab interferes too much. He’s always following me around, checking behind the sofas and under the beds,’ she says, as if that’s a valid reason to quit.

There’s only two of us, I reckon, while I look around for someone else. I mention it to Madan when the newest crop of maids demand the sky.

‘I don’t earn that kind of money,’ Madan says.

No, you’re retired now.

I let it slide.

I make do, keeping a part time in the evening.

‘Aren’t I clever? She comes in when Madan’s out for his evening walk,’ I tell Devika, gloating over my ingenuity, as we’re huddled over the Hindu Crossword on a Sunday evening.

Devika continues to peer at the crossword. She lifts her pen, bringing it to her mouth. ‘Pushover.’

‘Really? But that doesn’t make sense.’ I peer at the clue trying to annotate the word.

‘You are a pushover,’ she repeats, shaking her head without looking up.

Suddenly I feel my chest squeeze, my breath falter. I can’t move, not even to look at her.

I sit staring at the page, my eyes fixated on the words that begin to become sullied. A bit later, my eyes burn. I look away but realise she’s finally pricked my pride. We’re at the end of our time anyway. I say goodbye and think of it no more.

The word raises its ugly head the next morning along with the flush of the toilet. I stir, then curl up. ‘I have a headache today. I’m not going for a walk. Can you reduce the volume?’

‘Aum…’ he chants.

I pull the pillow over my ears.

When he begins to huff over his surya namaskars, I shuffle to the kitchen to begin the coffee.

‘I AM NOT,’ I say aloud, as I feed left-over idli crumbs to the pigeons cooing at the window-sill.

It feels like I’m coming down with a virus. My body tires and slacks. I stay in bed the next morning too. I miss my walks for a week.

Madan is sympathetic. Life goes on. ‘We have to go to the bank. I need a DD.’

I’m back by his side, listening as the clerk makes small talk while he prepares Madan’s DD.

‘Maybe I am a pushover,’ I think, unconsciously.

Sunday rolls along. I have a splitting headache again. Mohan’s friend, Ram comes into the kitchen as I’m making the coffee.

‘Can I have a glass of water, please?’ He smiles, all sweetness.

‘Why can’t you take turns?’ I ask him.

‘Excuse me?’

‘Does the card party always have to be at this house?’ I hand him the glass of water. He walks away, avoiding my eyes.

Within minutes, the men folk burst into laughter in the living room. Madan storms into the kitchen. ‘What do you mean?’

‘I’m not feeling well.’

‘That doesn’t warrant being rude to my friends!’

I finish pouring the coffee and set the tumblers in a tray. ‘Can you please take this out?’

He accepts
