From: Bikram Sharma<bikram.singh.sharma@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: A Vocabulary of Absence
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Days before his visa expired, Sandeep caught a flight back to Bangalore, leaving behind Alexandra and their apartment in Norwich. They had shared it for the final year of his PhD. Though the heater conked out half the time and the bathroom ceiling was stained green with water rings, the place had grown to become their home, cluttered with the warm detritus of their personal lives. Alex, laden with the responsibility of readying it for the next batch of tenants, had stumbled across an obvious revelation which she shared with Sandeep over the phone: without him, without their things, their home sweet home transformed into something ordinary and functional – a rental. A pretty shitty one at that. 

Two months later, she too caught a flight to Bangalore. 

While Alex had prepared to exchange a life in the UK for a life in India, Sandeep resumed working with his old business consultancy firm – no promotion, no pay hike, no questions asked about his gained academic experience. His return had been too smooth. He believed he had matured into an adult in Norwich, yet people acted like he’d never been away and treated him the same. He was settling into old routines – joining the boys for drinks on Church Street, stalling along the same traffic-congested routes, spending late nights lazing in front of the television. In an attempt to distance his present and past selves he moved into a tidy two-bedroom apartment in the centre of the city where the landlord didn’t ask too many questions. 

‘What do you mean by too many questions?’ Alex asked, her tone quizzical. 

He tried to explain. 

‘What does it matter if we’re married or not?’ Alex asked, her tone annoyed. 

He tried to explain again, recounting horror stories his friends had endured in Gurgaon and Hyderabad. Alex processed his answers in silence before finally saying, ‘Well, I’m travelling across continents to be with you. I don’t really care about nosy landlords and their crappy rules.’ He admired her defiance but was filled with a prickly sense of trepidation as he waited for her outside Bangalore airport’s arrivals hall. She appeared, looking shrunken. She cocked her head this way and that, in search of his face in a jostling crowd. He called out to her, his voice loud then soft. AL-ex. She rushed towards him, kissed him on the cheek despite his protestations of not here, not here, and collapsed in his arms. ‘I’m exhausted,’ she said into his shoulders. ‘Take me home.’ 

He carried her suitcase, extraordinarily heavy with the weight of her life. Inside was a Ziploc bag that contained pebbles the colour purple (Sandeep’s favourite), which they had collected from various beaches along Britain’s eastern coast. She filled a jar with those pebbles, and that jar became the centrepiece of their new bedroom. Detritus carried from shore to shore. 

For Alex, Bangalore was a difficult beast of broken roads. Crossings became a matter of life and death in which victory meant emerging with lungs shallow from pollution. She spoke of the simple pleasures she missed, like cycling to the park, or going for a midnight stroll down slippery cobblestoned lanes, or even just drinking water from a tap. And yet she coped well, better than Sandeep could have hoped. Her first week was spent sloughing off jet lag, painting self-portraits that were outlines containing startling splashes of yellow (her favourite). Sandeep would return from office to the sharp smell of acrylic. He would lie in bed and peel dried paint from her arms. If it was sunny she would explore the neighbourhood. She discovered an arts centre which hosted early-morning yoga sessions and made friends with two of the trainers, inviting them over for tea, then arts-and-crafts night, then movie night. Synonyms for girls’ nights. She began working freelance for an NGO in Bristol, earning British pounds that went into her British bank account. This made her at times financially dependent on Sandeep, something she disliked and repeatedly expressed by complaining about Brexit: ‘I should have converted my money when it was worth more than toilet paper.’ He didn’t mind. What’s yours is mine, he would say, meaning the opposite. 

One morning they woke up to a state-wide bandh. They lay in bed, watching television. The news focused on the Cauvery water issue, flashing images of farmers in Mysore and Mandya who were blocking highways to protest the Supreme Court’s verdict; some of the farmers lit tyres on fire, shouting slogans while curls of rubber mushroomed into dense black smoke. Sandeep muted the television. Alex stretched, tenting the bedsheets, and said, ‘It’s so peaceful.’ For the first time since she’d arrived, Bangalore was silent. From their balcony Sandeep looked down at the apartment complex’s cracked driveway, at the dhobi’s stall by the gate and the park across the street. There were no cars, no motorcycles, not even any pedestrians. Recognising this for the opportunity it was, he dragged Alex out of bed. Outside, tree branches swayed and leaves cascaded from the rustling canopy, carpeting the sidewalk a dirty orange. For Sandeep, it was like stepping back in time to a gentler Bangalore, one in which he and the neighbourhood children used to play cricket, lagoori or hide and seek. When he told her this, she held his hand. With a laugh, she leapt into the middle of the street, pulling him with her so that their bodies softly collided. The invisible strings that tugged his body into ducking, swerving, weaving to dodge traffic went razor taut. But there were no blaring horns. No sweltering fumes. The air was light and leaves crackled under their every step. They spent the whole day walking down empty lanes, past shuttered shops and silent markets, Sandeep naming in Hindi those things Alex pointed at, slowly introducing her to a vocabulary unfamiliar to her tongue. 

Flash cards entered their lives, strewn across the surfaces of their apartment. Alex took to writing down useful Hindi or Kannada words, along with their English meanings, and Sandeep tested her. Though her pronunciation was off, her language skills were excellent. Soon you’ll be more fluent than I am, he said, watching her shuffle cards contentedly. Despite this encouragement, fruit vendors continued to laugh whenever she asked for kelas. ‘How is it funny? I’m just trying to speak the language.’ 

Sandeep understood what she was saying. In many ways their lives had turned dichotomous: in the privacy of their apartment they were as they had been in Norwich, comfortable walking naked from room to room; but in public there was a palpable sense of unbelonging. At university he had grown accustomed to kissing in public – as a form of greeting, consolation, or even as a simple expression of happiness – but in Bangalore such displays of affection troubled him. Outdoors, he hesitated to kiss, to curl an arm around her shoulder. It made him wonder if his identity was dependent on location, as though there existed distinct geographical variations of himself. 

His parents visited for a weekend. Listening to his mother and Alex get along so well, he felt proud, even accomplished. But this feeling was obliterated at the end of the trip when his father, ears blushing red, had sat them down at their own table to say, ‘Look, I don’t want to tell you kids what to do, and I’m so happy you both are so…but you have to be careful here.’ Sandeep’s mother avoided eye contact. ‘People are quick to draw assumptions,’ his father finished. After they left, Alex was brittle with anger. She believed his parents were ashamed of her. He promised her that it wasn’t like that, that they were just looking out for the two of them. Anger flared at the memory of the conversation, and just as quickly burnt into remorse. He had kissed her naked shoulders in apology. 

But his father’s unspoken words took root. Standing in Johnson Market, helping Alex pick onions from jute sacks, Sandeep was uncomfortably aware of eyes tracing the contours of her body. At home he suggested she wear full-sleeved shirts. For safety’s sake. Her argument was succinct: ‘Why the hell should I? It’s so bloody hot outside.’ 

The Cauvery situation worsened. The government ignored the Supreme Court and soon more bandhs followed. They came like water to a parched throat. Bangalore retreated in time and Alex and Sandeep took to walking its empty streets, expanding their combined vocabulary by creating new names for the city. Ghost Town. The Abandoned City. The Land of How It Used to Be. Garden City Reborn. 

New words, new names, and with every passing day Sandeep introduced new suggestions. Better to take a cab than an auto. Better to go with him than go alone. Better to walk in the day rather than in the night. Better to avoid walking by yourself. Better to wear trousers than shorts. Better to wear shirts than tank-tops. Better to be safe than sorry. Alex’s discontent grew heavy, settling like thick layers of silt. She went for walks, timing them so that he returned from work to an empty apartment. When he called her name, stretching it from Alex to Alexandra and listening to its echo, he would feel ashamed, petty, small. He took to cleaning. He took to polishing. The cutlery in the kitchen shone brilliantly. Why was he so concerned about conservatism? he would ask himself. Why was the Sandeep in Bangalore so different from the one in Norwich – the same one who had lain in a park while Alex had done a handstand above him, lowering herself till their lips met.

And then came the day of the man on a motorbike. Alex had gone for a walk. Sandeep, irritated with her and irritated with himself for feeling irritated, was busy boiling water on the stove and wiping the kitchen counters clean. The front door opened. I’m making tea, he said, but Alex ignored him. She went straight to their bedroom. He was surprised to find her standing by the curtains, watching the road.

What happened? he asked.

‘There was a man on a motorbike. He told me someone was following me and asked if he could drop me off safely.’

And?

‘I had only just stepped out of the building.’

It took Sandeep a few seconds to process the significance of her words. Realisation brought with it a calamitous sense of vertigo. He stood beside her and together they watched motorists drive by as sunlight diffused into a pale blue, bringing with it the fluttering wings of bats and moths. The stove was still on. Most of the water had evaporated.

The next day he returned early from work to find her stepping out once again.

Where are you going?

‘For my walk.’

But, I mean, what about the man on the motorbike?

‘Well, what about him? It’s not like it’s the first time this stuff has happened.’

What do you mean it’s not the first time? Have other people followed you?

‘Couple of times. There was some idiot outside the Arts Centre who kept whistling at me, but I asked for a lift that day. And the security guard made sure he didn’t bother us. It’s no big deal. I’m used to it. Even in Norwich, remember, there was that guy in the car?’ She shrugged. ‘Anyway, I better go.’

No.

‘Excuse me?’

Give it a day or two. It’s not safe.

‘But this happens all the time. Why are you acting like you’ve never seen it before?’

The months they had spent in Bangalore were tainted by this knowledge; previous events suddenly made fraught with danger. Why hadn’t she told him? As she pressed the button calling for the lift, anger sliced through his body; he wanted her to wait, to *listen* to him. He grabbed her, yanking her by the wrist so hard that she gasped. Within hours purple bruises bloomed across her skin.

She had locked herself in the bedroom.

They did not sleep together. Sandeep lay on the living room sofa, staring at his hands, his fingers, unable to believe they were capable of so monstrous a betrayal. In the early hours of the morning he awoke to find her across from him, sitting in an armchair and weeping into a pillow. Her body shuddered with grief as she spoke: ‘You don’t listen to me anymore. Who am I supposed to talk to? I’ve never felt this lonely in our relationship.’

I’m sorry, he said. What he wanted most was to comfort her, to hold her in his arms, but he was terrified of the language his body had last used. In the moonlit darkness of their living room, he whispered to her, I promise, no more. The silence of Bangalore during a bandh ballooned their walls. She did not speak. Eventually, she fell asleep. The next morning, she spoke little, though she continued with her regular routine.

Sandeep turned into parchment – time tearing him into halves, then quarters, waiting until she left before scattering his remains across Bangalore. But she didn’t leave. To his shame she wore full-sleeved shirts to cover her bruises; the purple band of discolouration around her wrist slowly turning green, then yellow, before fading away.

After a long day at work he returned to an empty apartment. Streetlights were flickering to life and she was nowhere in sight. Nervous, he cleaned the apartment, collecting all of her flashcards, even those that had slid under their bed. He smoothed their dog-eared edges. They were no longer necessary as Alex had graduated from learning words to stringing them together to form coherent sentences, but they reminded him of a moment during a bandh – prompted by farmers committing suicide and attacks increasing in both states due to the government’s delaying tactics – when he and Alex had been walking the empty streets and come across a bungalow. It must have been forty or fifty years old. It had a clay courtyard. Stray dogs lay curled up under the shade of a tamarind tree. Worn red steps led to a doorway and chipped yellow pillars supported the roof. It was the most idyllic place Sandeep had seen, a tangible representative of a time long past. Alex was frowning. Her face was contorted in concentration. She was trying to think of a word, a new one for their expanding intimate language, one that captured the feeling of this time-displaced Bangalore.

What was the word? It seemed impossible that he could forget. He raced to the window, then down the stairs to the apartment complex’s gate, waiting for her. When at last she appeared at the top of the street, he waved as he had done when he first saw her at the airport. Confused, she waved back. He clutched at the flashcards. There was a chance, he hoped, that if she answered this one question, then perhaps he could relearn the vocabulary of their relationship, relearn the language they had created together, so that in time he could express his regret and take them back to a place of comfort, safety, and trust. 


