From: Khushboo Upadhyay<khushbooupadhyay1@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: The Desert
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Mohit whipped the egg white, topped it with yogurt, honey and laid it over perfectly cubed strawberries. He was smiling all throughout. This was a major dessert discovery for him after a long time. He had got bored of making the usual chocolate mug cake every other day as an accompaniment to their 4pm Green Tea ritual.

Samantha got up at 3:45 pm hearing the buzzing alarm and she smiled instantly. The desert's fragrance had filled their beautiful home. She got up, wore her tshirt and ran to hug Mohit.

Mohit: Hey! Samantha: Heyy... filled her mouth with a big bite.

Mohit laughed and kissed her.

Samantha: I will miss you so much.

He looked at her questioningly.

Samantha: Your mom is coming tomorrow. Mohit: So? Samantha: So.

Mohit gave her a tap on the head. Samantha laughed.

Mohit: I can always go to Raj's place and make a dessert for you.

He said slyly, sipping on his tea. Samantha looked at him, took a piece of the freshly made pastry and popped it on Mohit's head.

Mohit: You are wasting my creation! (almost crying, while taking it off from his head and gulping it straight away) Samantha: You are wasting my creation too. (while kissing him on his forehead)

Mohit smiled and hugged her.

It was 4pm. The real alarm croaked. Samantha woke up from her dream with a jerk. She could feel his arms even now. It was the first thought that came to her as she woke up. He was gone. It was the strangest feeling ever. The feeling kept repeating everyday in her dreams, in her thoughts, in all walks of her life.

Mohit and Samantha had started living in together the day they received their job appointment letters. They had been together since school, studied together in management college and got selected for the same company during campus interviews. Theirs is a match made in heaven, the friends used to say. Everybody agreed except Mohit's mother. She didn't find her good enough for her all rounder, handsome son and to top it all Samantha was an orphan which didn't go quite well with the mother. "I will find you a better girl. I promise. And someone from our caste and religion," she kept telling Mohit. He never understood how to even out things and after a point he stopped trying. He lived two lives- one with her mother in Jamshedpur and one here in Mumbai, with his Sammy. He didn't give up on either.

Samantha was to turn 28, coming Friday and both of them were fighting over the celebration party details.

Samantha: It is my birthday for god's sake, and I want and WANT a gooey dark chocolate filled lava big cake.

Mohit (laughed looking at his 'kid'): But most of them don't like dark chocolate. It's bitter darling. Let's get all time, people friendly Black Forest cake. I also love it. And I can always make you dark chocolate mousse special cake, whenever you want.

Samantha: This is the reason I want to get married to Rohan. He is the best for me. I can be myself with him.

A pillow came flying at her.

Samantha shouted: I will kill you. Truth is truth. Rohan accepts all my wishes and my tastes.

Mohit: Shut up!

Samantha: Seriously! Like yesterday I farted before him. And he didn't even laugh at the moment.

Mohit: What?! You farted before him!

Mohit almost died laughing at her.

Samantha: And look at you! Shameless! It happened accidentally. I didn't know he was near my cubicle.

Mohit: So this is the reason you want to get married to him? You fart before me and then then you discuss about what food caused it. I mean Sammy YOU DISCUSS YOUR FART WITH ME !!!!

Now Samantha was laughing looking at the adorable boyfriend she had.

Samantha: You are cute!

Mohit: ohh god! No!

Samantha: Yes you are! Now! We are getting the chocolate cake and I don't care whether anybody bothers eating it or no.

Mohit folded hands at her and jotted it down in the list.

Mohit: You get married to me. I never utter a single word, however angry, embarrassed or irritated I get with you. I accept Sammy, the bully!

Samantha: Such a sad, sad proposal! Fuck You!

Mohit: Exactly!

She almost ran towards him to kick his butt, when he got hold of her leg, got her down and kissed her.

Samantha: I have to do so much to seduce you!

Mohit: Ohh PLEASE! You do all this because you know I LOVE YOU.

Samantha was laughing while Mohit cuddled her.

Mohit: We are getting married on your birthday.

He whispered in her ears.

Samantha was stunned for some seconds and then gave a wolf like loud howl. Mohit was zapped by her reaction.

Mohit: Marraige plans cancelled.

Samantha giggled and ran towards the phone.

Mohit: Everybody knows about it.

Samantha looked at him startled.

Samantha: ohh my god! ohh my god!

Then she jumped with joy in the whole house shouting her 'To Do List'. Mohit smiled, and started jotting all her demands. The next three days went in executing so much stuff. They had always wanted a simple, home wedding where they would make promises to eachother before the presence of their best friends. But still the preparations were tiring.

It was wednesday, 9:30 pm,Sammy had the last drop of beer directly from the pitcher's tap. Mohit looked so proud.

Mohit: My Girl! Now tell me what's for the dessert? (winking)

Mohit laughed aloud and the bullet hit his head. He collapsed. Samantha's heart beat stopped and she fell on him. She lay there on him. She could hear nothing, except his last breaths. The firing stopped after years it seemed, though the news and reports tell her it was fifteen minutes of attack at the Leopald cafe.

Friday came and she heard him whisper- 'happy birthday' to her.

Two months later Samantha went to Leopald cafe. It was a wednesday like it was on 26/11. She waited outside talking to the balloon seller till the table she and Mohit had occupied that fateful night got vacant. She bought 5 heart shaped baloons. The seller smiled. She smiled more in return, thanked him, went inside the cafe and sat at the destined table.

Samantha: Do you have any dessert in black forest flavour?

Waiter: Sorry Ma'am, we don't have anything in Black Forest. Would you like something else?

Samantha: Okay. Let me think. Give me a moment.

He smiled and left. There was lot of cheer around in the hall. A group of friends where celebrating. The waiter returned few moments later.

Waiter: Ma'am, actually that group there is celebrating a birthday. And they distributed the cake amongst all of us ...

Samantha looked at him, waiting for him to say something more. The waiter instead looked at his colleague in the corner and signaled him. The other waiter came towards them with a tray. He kept a saucer on the table and it had a slice of the cake, with a small candle burning beside it. Samantha looked at it and smiled.

Samantha: Thank you!

The waiters smiled and excused themselves.

She indulged in the black forest cake while looking at the bullet-riddled walls, mirrors and that group of people celebrating a life.

