From: Sayantan Ghosh<sayantansunnyghosh@gmail.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Mrs Neeta Who Lived in Neeti Bagh
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Neeta Sukumar used to live on the third floor flat of a decrepit government quarter in Ghitorni in the South West district of Delhi. When she got married, she shifted to an expansive four-storied bungalow in the heart of Neeti Bagh, a prime location neighborhood that boasts of wide roads, playgrounds for children and clean air. Neeta remembered being happy the day she first stepped inside the colony, the first sound she heard was the chirping of a cricket from the gigantic banyan tree on the sidewalk next to the local market.

Her shift was sudden. One day she is going to college wearing a six-year-old skirt, and the next day Samarth’s car stops outside her house. He steps out and greets her father with that flamboyant smile on his face she recognizes so well now. He says he saw her somewhere, maybe when she was entering her computer coaching class and was instantly smitten; then asks her hand for marriage. Neeta’s father was an orthodox man. He sent her to a government school, always paid his taxes in advance and never purchased anything on the internet.

He wanted to find an academic or a doctor for Neeta, he always said. That day he doesn’t ask Samarth about his family. All Samarth tells him is he’s a lawyer and has a bungalow in Neeti Bagh. Few minutes later she peeps from her first floor window and sees them shaking hands. Her destiny was sealed at that moment, some unwritten deal was signed without pens. Her sisters walk into her room and hug her. They look happy. Their faces tell her she is expected to smile. Neeta doesn’t disappoint them.

Today is different. Today she is not in Delhi. She is on a weekend getaway with her husband of one year in Gwalior. Samarth has booked a giant room at the Neemrana hotel. This used to be Sardar Deorao Jadhav’s summer house. Now it’s bricks and mortar and fables in history books stacked neatly on wooden furniture. History changes hands. Every time someone rewrites it, it changes color, changes form, switches sides. The present, in comparison, has been more constant over several years. The moral bankruptcy always aptly compensated by industrial breakthroughs.

Neeta thought she’s like history. Repeating herself but only at someone else’s discretion.

Samarth has gone out of the room to get a bag of chips. Neeta loves chips. Samarth always tells her You are buying air. She likes the thought. That they have space to breathe inside the sealed containers. She envies them a little. Yet he gets them for her because he knows how much she loves them. He always gets her what she wants; at least everything she asks for in words. He never complains only when she doesn’t question. She has seen him change, on nights when she’s inadvertently asked him what he was doing out so late.

She knows every time she’s crossed some line. It was not a part of the agreement my father and my husband signed while handing ownership, she thinks.

She has smelled women’s perfume on his shirt and stared at his face silently. He always smiles back at her. Every time he smiles, she pretends that nothing is wrong. It’s a pretence she has learnt to be comfortable with. Like living with an old flat-mate who snores.

But the smells get stronger.

 Sometimes they are a mix of two different scents. Neeta has the nose of a Retriever. She can’t tell for certain whether they came onto Samarth’s shirt at the same time or one before the other. She can only tell that it happened sometime between five p.m. Saturday and two thirty p.m. Sunday.



She can see the peacocks from her room. The hotel’s lawn has many trees, parakeets singing from early dawn. She wanted to be woken up by them. But she was awake all night. Perhaps she woke them up with the sound of her footsteps. But Samarth slept peacefully. His face calm and serene like the gentle water in a deep sea.

Samarth seldom makes love to her. He enters her like he owns her. She enjoys it. She was made the Headgirl in school without being asked. She was the eldest daughter and had to make sure her sisters crossed the road safely. She likes being led by Samarth, when he tells her where to sit, what to cook or when he decides the time of sex.

They had gone for a similar two-day expedition before their marriage. The families were talking venues and menus then. Samarth told her he wants to explore her possibilities. He wanted to know if their bodies were compatible. Neeta didn’t understand what that meant then. She had never even kissed anyone. The only time she held hands with a boy, her cousins bashed him up in the middle of the chowk so badly that he had to miss a year in school.

She agreed. They drove at over eighty miles an hour. She felt the wind hit her face, like a gush of water released from a dam. For a brief moment she wished she was alone. She was excited about the night, diving into his mine of thoughts without any preparation. But if it wasn’t him driving she would have asked the driver to stop the car somewhere so she could stand and caress the mountains without a hurry.

But she knew he wouldn’t listen. He wouldn’t say no either. He’d just tell her something that fits the crypt of logic and convince her. She knew it didn’t matter to him if it was the mountains around them or the ocean. He wasn’t interested in where they were headed. Or where they came from.

That night he made her wear a black leather dress that barely covered her breasts and ran only enough to cover her cunt.

She felt shy, tried to guard her insides by putting her hands in front. Samarth asked her to bite her lips. He was naked from top, only a pair of denims loosely dangling from his waist down. The belt was detached from its hook.

She asked him if she could come sit on the bed. He didn’t answer. He didn’t even look at her. Only carefully cleaned the lens of his vintage Pentax. There was rain at the window, sprinkles of thick hydrogen on the white marble floor. Samarth asked her to walk towards it and stand near the ridge facing him.

He then pointed the camera at her and waited, like a huntsman waits for his prey. She became the bait instantly. The water came in meandering the glass panes and wet her hair first; they curled up, glued to her skin like a baby cementing its position in the womb. Then slowly her entire upper body got encompassed; dripping, freezing, shivering in pain and sorrow.

Samarth sat still, phlegmatic as a sniper. Neeta shut her eyes and waited for her next command. She imagined what he must be doing to the other women he met outside. Did he stow them in a corner too and paint them? Or did he like letting them loose underneath the burning sky and watch them take wing, flutter and soar. Only so he could practice his archery later.



Today she only saw the peacocks. Perhaps it was going to rain again.

She walked out into the portico and her eyes met the woman who was staying in the next villa. She was taking pictures of the birds with her mobile phone and instantly sending them to someone. They met in the restaurant during breakfast, where everyone introduced themselves formally. It seemed she was with her husband, they even used the same last name.

But then he could be any older man she was accompanying; hotel registers seldom tell the truth.

She was wearing a red top and a black skirt that hugged her bottom to never let go; the same clothes she wore at breakfast. Neeta noticed how Samarth’s eyes spiraled through her bare legs to her smooth waistline and her coiled chest. Striking and flawless as she was, even Neeta could barely keep her own eyes off her.

If Samarth was around he’d be staring at her now, she thought. He’d perhaps imagine undressing her in his mind, or something zanier. He didn’t like normal, normal bothered him he said. Even while role-playing he wouldn’t want her to put on a costume; instead he’d become the various men she had known in her life.

Sometimes her cousin brother from Rangoon, often the Chemistry teacher who came on every Wednesday to give her tuitions, her employer, her dentist, the janitor and even her father. She was expected to improvise. He never hurt her body, she understood it’s because he craved for its broken, cracked imperfections too much to risk it.

He wanted her to be the mother of his child. Samarth never told her so, but she knew it was why he had married her. Else he could have married any of the other nameless women he met in hotel rooms or parking lots. She was the chosen one.

Neeta felt fortunate. She could have easily been at the other end; unzipping, consuming and swallowing him because he could afford her. Instead she’s in the safe haven of his spotless successful family life, doing everything else the others did but labeled with legal legitimacy.

She felt privileged. She sucked his cock in parking spaces too. But if an old family friend or a distant relative happened to catch them in the act, they would only be teased for still being so adventurous and juvenile. If he gets caught with another girl, they would feel disgusted, repelled and ashamed of him.

Some would sit for a drink with him to tell him he’s not doing the right thing by betraying Neeta’s trust. A few may confess to him, unburdening their own guilt, looking at it as an opportunity.



She imagined the baby they would have. If it’s a boy, she’d want his hair to be like Samarth’s; dense and dark like coal. She could sense the excitement her parents and friends would feel whenever she put pictures of the baby up on Facebook. She could see them flooding the page with comments. Samarth would make sure to visit the page once the frenzy died down and like a few comments from people who mattered. He was particular about keeping everyone contented.



There was a knock on the door at this point. She went and opened it for Samarth. He had gone for a swim in the pool, but came back again without taking as much as a dip. He was scared of going into the water, although he was trained in swimming.

Neeta felt sheltered in water. She felt its embrace on her skin, cocooned herself each time in a small prayer. Everything about her life was linear; only she could interrupt the order now. Her father gloated in self-pride every time someone asked him how he had managed to find such an accomplished groom for his eldest daughter. Her mother knew it was his job to do the talking. She found it easier to overlook than interfere.

Samarth was a compassionate man who did charities and cared for dogs. He never raised his voice, certainly by no means pushed or prodded her ever. From where Neeta came, it wasn’t unordinary for an aunt to turn up at their house with a swollen face or a split forehead. Neeta was the blessed one who managed to escape.

Samarth was now skulking around the room. He went to some of the best schools in the country. But nobody taught him to deal with failure. Neeta knew he wanted to go back to the pool and conquer it. She got up and held his arm.

She could feel the blood rushing through his veins, his muscles tightened where she gripped him. He didn’t look at her, because then she may get a hint of what he felt inside. What if in his eyes she saw him smashing her head against the cold steely marble of the room and watch, as her brain spreads itself like a la carte on the floor. Another feather on his sophisticated unscathed cap; cordon bleu.

Neeta pulled him outside the room and dragged him like a child to the pool. Then she grasped his hand and walked inside the water. Clear, blue, familiar arrogance of transparency. Samarth clenched his fists and held her arm and shoulders to feel safe. She didn’t disappoint him.

It began to drizzle, turning the water icy in seconds. Samarth’s entire body quaked, but he had already come too deep. He didn’t have the courage to leave Neeta’s hand and walk back from there. She turned towards him and looked into his eyes. It assured him that she’ll take care of things for him.

It had always been her role. Like it was her mother’s in another household. Or it could be another mother and another house. Lines blur when rain meets groundwater.

Their bodies soon started floating, became lighter; like paper pulp. She was on her back, staring up; her ruby-red eyes sliced the sky apart in bits. Samarth had his face in the water, occasionally spying outside in search of air. They moved slowly, but within a few strokes he realized his heart had steadied.

He felt culpable, this strange criminal angst raged through his remains. He tried looking at her face but the water was too much for him to see. Then he felt her hand, on his cock. He was in his costume, she stroked it intensely from over it.

Samarth wanted to cry out in pain, but there was too much water for anyone to hear. He thought if he came then his life would be dragged out of his body through his junk. He had to hold it back to make it out alive.



And then she left him, mid-water. His hand reached for hers, only to find vacuum and fizz. She watched his body drown, struggling for both air and earth. She knew this was one of those defining moments when things change course without human intervention. Controls shift when nature desires redemption.

In moments, she held his hand again. And pulled him up. If he dies, this game is over for her too. He has played it for a long long time, hide and seek and dumb charades. But his money, his women, his aggression, his certificates and medals, and his betrayal couldn’t keep him afloat.

While her father’s bloating face, her mother’s jaded acceptance, her sisters’ tender hugs, her night sky, her star gazing, her cocoon and her shelter, they remained where they were. They reached the finishing end together. She wouldn’t leave his hand ever again, she thought.

But every time he would come back home with another creature’s smell stung on his flesh, she would let him slip fleetingly and remind him what it feels like to sink. They would grow old together. Whenever he would fall sick, she would cure her with tenderness. He would get used to it.

He would grow older, weaker. He would only start smelling of his own dead skin one day. Then the diseases will come, one after another, in batches. Age is brutal. Some nights when he would wrestle to get up, struggle to reach for the inhaler or walk up to the toilet, calling her names in broken verses, she would leer at him from the shadows, and wait.

Mrs Neeta, who came from the third floor flat of a decrepit government quarter in Ghitorni in the South West district of Delhi, would wait with an invisible vintage Pentax pointed firmly towards him. Like a huntsman waits for his prey, for the perfect moment. 

