From: Anuradha Joshi<anuradhapoet@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Facing Turmoil with Dignity
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Mandsaur is a city in the state Madhya Pradesh, the center of India. Medha had recently joined the block development office in Mandsaur. She and her senior, Mr. Garg were visiting nearby villages and returned to the head office in the evening. Fifteen years had passed after India's independence. New schools and colleges started. Even Mandsaur buzzed with stories of progress. Mr. Garg was leaving to join his new posting. He said,” Pay attention to two main bodies: the college campus and the Hydel project”. She made a mental note of his instructions.

Back in her office, Medha smiled finding a glass of water placed as per her instructions. But one file caught her attention now. The one reporting a land dispute between two adjoining villages. There were records of a business deal between the villages. As the clock struck eight, she headed home.

Next day, Medha wore her favorite trouser and kurta with a scarf. Dressing like Asha Parekh made her happy. Bidding farewell to Mr. Garg was an excuse to know about the dispute. She tried to enquire regarding the land dispute at the railway station. But she encountered a silent reluctance. This surprised her as he had discussed other files. It intrigued her that this land dispute file did not appear in the hand over itinerary. Medha reached her office where she greeted the officer in charge of the local police headquarters. Dressed in the official attire, Bhaskar was well versed with the local issues. She discussed the issues where she needed the officer’s support. Medha realized the dispute was a hot potato; a case of narcotic trading gone sour between the two adjoining villages.

Medha visited the new Pashupatinath temple, inaugurated November 1961. Built along the Shivna river in the southern end of the city, Medha liked the greenery. She stood gazing at the foliage and the much talked Shivling. She stopped at the gram panchayat office of the disputed land. Uneasy smiles welcomed Medha in the panchayat office. Even the air felt tense. She did not mention the infighting’s but made small talk with the villagers while she introduced herself.

In the evening Medha played badminton. She liked the club with a swimming pool and an open air theater. She had watched movie “Chayya” starring Sunil Dutt. This evening, she relaxed in the canteen sipping lemonade. Bhaskar walked to meet her and his hastened strides showed urgency. Why is he wearing a uniform at this hour? Medha sensed stress as he placed his hat on the table. Bhaskar said the villagers lodged a fresh FIR about the business dispute and he had to admit that complaint at the behest of the political leader. Medha nodded as she gleaned the updates. In the car she and Bhaskar chalked out a plan to contain the new development. Bhaskar was to visit the villages with his team. He asked Medha not to accompany his team. Medha agreed to let Bhaskar solve the issue.

As the car turned the curve to enter office premises, a knot built up in her belly seeing the political flags and shouting. A police van was escorting her car. So she did not fear a physical assault. She was in a thick of the dispute and political maneuvers. Medha stepped out of the car. Shantiji, the leader Bhaskar mentioned, greeted. She smiled back. Such leaders never bothered her but she would hear him out. She waved at her staff to seat the leader in her office. Medha visited the library and sat in a chair next to a huge table. She asked the librarian to get her the land law books of Madhya Bharat and Vindhya Pradesh. Madhya Pradesh formed by merging these two states and Chattisgarh. Medha was good at sifting through law books. She found the required information. She remembered how she memorized the clauses and sub clauses during the training period. The training did not prepare her to face leaders such as Shantiji. This, she learned under the tutelage of Yeshwant sir, now posted in Bhopal.

After exchanging pleasantries with Shantiji, Medha turned her sweetest voice and commented that the followers of Shantiji were making too much noise outside her office. Among the crisp samosas and terse sweet talks, Medha stood her ground. Shantiji received the message that she will talk only when the mob disperses. He motioned his assistant to take necessary steps. The assistant walked out. Medha got the nod from her office people that the protesters had dispersed. Medha placed the thick law books on the table. After hearing out Shantiji and villager’s perspective, she went full speed on the official monologues related to the block jurisdictions and the law of the land. She did not comment regarding her predecessors Mr. Garg's action or lack of it. Shantiji fretted and frowned and left the office in disgust. Bhaskar dropped in her office late in the afternoon. He appeared calm. The villagers agreed to withdraw their demands. The majority of police team returned to the city. Two constables were stationed in the village as a precautionary measure, Bhaskar reported. How long the truce would last, Medha wondered?

Things were humdrum. Medha wrote a lengthy letter to her parents describing her first month in the new place. She got upset when Bhaskar won every game. She stopped playing against him and played with officer’s wives. Projects were going at their usual pace and she continued her local visits. Medha kept in touch regarding the upcoming festivities and the police protection requests. Both, she and Bhaskar sent in reports with details of the preparations for the festivities. Shantiji’s tactics of instigating people were well known. Peace shriveled in his presence.

At crack of dawn, on the festival day Medha visited the temple. Thoughts of the evening procession curled up her brows. She prayed and lingered longer near the deity. Although Bhaskar was confident, Medha felt uneasy about this procession. Back in her office, she saw a note from Bhaskar stating he had left to see the preparations for the evening. They had decided to travel together in the afternoon. This sudden change in decision appeared out of place to her. She glanced over the reports and files. But with a wavering mind she did not wish to make hasty decisions. Later, she yelled at the driver to take her car out as she wanted to head towards the village. The tone surprised the driver. She sat pensive in the car. A police van was following her. She asked the escorting inspector regarding Bhaskar’s early visit. The inspector responded with silence.

From the outskirts of village, Medha saw the crowd swelling up and a huge hysteria build up by Shantiji's speech. She spoke to Bhaskar at the other end of the village over the police phones. She heard “Under control”. The crowd in the other village was getting ready for the procession. Shantiji waved at her from a distance and Medha caught a smirk on his face. Medha saw that Shantiji was proceeding towards the adjoining village although this was not part of the agreed plan between the village administration, her office and the police department. Medha grabbed her mega phone and told the escort van to stop Shantiji from entering the next village. She requested the crowd not to enter the adjoining village. But the crowd had a mind of its own. The police phone lines were not working and she could not inform Bhaskar regarding this development. What followed was a battle of stones and heavy sticks between the villagers from either side. Many men were wounded and several collapsed in the ensuing stampede. The women and children screamed at deafening pitch. Medha's voice over the mega phone drowned in this conundrum. She and the police inspector screamed and tried to stop people from throwing stones. But the madness grew and continued for hours. Medha stood stunned near her car clutching the phones and shouting her lungs out at the same time.

Dust hung in the sky as an aftermath of the clashes. It took several hours to take the injured to hospital. Late night, she spoke to Bhaskar who was doing the same in the other village. Both looked at each other and knew they were doomed. But she did not ask about his sudden departure early in the day. In the wee hours of the morning as they returned to office, she saw a telegram from Yeshwant sir asking for the riot report. She spent hours preparing a report and her staff typing it. The entire office switched to a hyper activity gear. Hours later, Medha returned to her bungalow exhausted after repeating her statements umpteen times.

A month of deliberating with the Mandsaur enquiry committee had taken its toll. She showed no emotions and walked like a zombie. The reporters were having a field day. Riot news sold like hot cakes. Politicians of every hue visited the villages. She and Bhaskar had not met after the riots. She had no clue about the statements filed by Shantiji or Bhaskar, the two main witness to the clashes. Her staff did not speak to her much. Her stance on the land issue was in variance to Shantiji’s group. Medha was in an unofficial seclusion. She waited for the final reports of the inquiry committee.

One Monday she noticed one envelope placed on her table. The usual files were missing. No one had greeted her. She picked the brown ‘Government of India’ envelope and back tracked her steps to the car. She expected the letter but wished that it never arrived. Back home, Medha placed the envelope on her bed side table. It was her suspension letter. Medha had no inclination to open the envelope. She would be even more distraught to find Yeshwant sir's signature on the letter. She cried through the night. The cook offered tea but she would not speak to him or his wife who came to console her.

In the morning, Medha dragged the suitcase out of her living room and prepared to go to her ancestral home. She did not wish to face her parents with the suspension news. As she reached the car, Bhaskar arrived. She stood clutching the handle of the car like a statue. Seeing her suitcases, he gently asked where she was going. No response. Bhaskar and Medha sat on the steps leading to the house for a long time. Nobody spoke. After several moments of silence which seemed like an eternity, Bhaskar told Medha to stay in her official bungalow. Medha stood up silently and walked back to her room. The car blew dust as it drove away. The servants were jubilant. The goats bleated and hens were extra playful in the backyard.

Medha visited the Pashupatinath temple daily and listened to the songs on a radio. She did not write her weekly letters to her parents. Then one day, Yeshwant sir arrived with Bhaskar. Medha was in tears seeing them. She tried to stay calm. Medha had to be ruthless in her officer’s role and was considered emotionless by her colleagues. But she broke down like a dam had come apart. When the furious flurry of tears subsided, she listened to the news of negotiations with the affected parties. Yashwant Sir and Bhaskar were acting behind the scenes during the enquiry process. Shantiji’s party bosses saw through his game plans. Medha smiled after a long time. That night, Medha spoke with her home staff. The glint in her eyes was apparent. She wrote to her parents mentioning a “small” issue with her work.

A month passed. She was back in her job! Medha celebrated by watching a movie in the open air theater. She imitated Waheeda Rehaman from the movie 'Saheb Biwi aur Gulam' after returning from the club. Marigold garlands and ladoos greeted Medha in her office. She looked forward to playing badminton and watching Sunil Dutt movies.
