From: Saon Bhattacharya<saongupta@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: The Flame of the Forest
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

The fire licked at the gold and ebony stripes. Fur and fire seemed melded together in a macabre dance of death, mimicking each other’s fiery patterns till it almost seemed as though one were looking at mirror images through the smoky haze of burning flesh and bones.

All the forest officials and staff stood around in a tight circle as the corpses of Baghin Noor and her two cubs were ceremoniously burnt on a pyre of dry teakwood logs. The Chief Conservator of Forests could hardly bear to stand around and watch the cremation, but protocol demanded that he be present till the very end. Till dust had turned to dust. Ashes to ashes.

One of the forest guards occasionally raked in the glowing embers and flying soot towards the pyre with a makeshift broom of scraggly twigs and leaves in an attempt to gain some semblance of control. It was he who had first alerted the forest conservation team of the birth of the tigress Noor’s latest litter of four cubs. He had watched over the young family through these last months, zealously tracking the growth of the cubs. And today two of them lay with their mother on the burning pyre. But more than sorrow it was anger that raged through his veins. All the days and nights of back-breaking toil, and of extreme personal danger had to finally come to this? He raised his calloused hand to his weather-beaten cheek, as if to feel the unseen slap. Bristling with insult and bottled up fury, he stole a glance at the Conservator.

An astute government official in his mid-forties, the Chief Conservator had taken off his glasses right at that very moment to wipe his streaming eyes and flushed face. The air hung heavy with the acrid smoke of blazing logs doused with fossil fuel. As he was about to slip back his glasses, his red-rimmed eyes locked with those of his subordinate. Both read each other’s states of mind perfectly, although no words were exchanged.

No words were exchanged between any other souls either; although a forest full of eyes and hearts above and beyond the blazing pyre looked on. For a few moments it felt as though all life stood still. A flock of *neelkanth* kept to their perches, refusing any glimpses of their rolling, ultramarine flight. The drongos seemed to have pulled in their glossy black tail-ends, and the peacocks refused to call or even to fan out their thousand eyes. A monitor lizard hung out its head from a hole up an Ashok tree; and the resident pack of *dhols* too kept to themselves at a distance, hardly making a move, while a few lone jackals peered out of the undergrowth.

Despite a steady breeze, the forest’s sentinel trees of *palash*, *mahua*, *jamun* and *sal* refused to bend a twig or even to stir a leaf. The ghostly gum trees stood out, starkly white with their bare limbs and smooth trunks—representative of the funereal mood of the forest mourning her loss. And so the acrid smoke billowed and spread through the forest on the wings of the blowing breeze, rousing grief and touching the heart of darkness that lurked within the jungle.

A regal creature shifted its weight, crunching the dried *sagwan* and bamboo leaves underfoot. A hundred eyes turned at the movement and the sound. They saw him standing among the bamboo grove by the dry water hole, but none alerted with a single call. Neither the *langurs*, nor the *sambars*, nor even the nervous *chitals*. They merely felt the pain in his mesmerising eyes. They said you could see death in those eyes, so universally beautiful were they. Much like a meeting with the Maker, when little else mattered thereafter.

His, however, was a singular tale, whispered and howled about the forest floor and canopy for many years. No one had heard anything quite like that before; but then there never had been anyone quite like him before...

***

Miles away from the sombre scene, unseen fires burned at yet another heart as black as the charred teak logs—blacker than the tar used to level the metalled roads that were being constructed through the forest. The Contractor, with his fingers in many pies insignificant and immense, writhed with disappointed rage. Months of careful planning and stage setting had come to nothing. Of the money lost, he did not care; and was prepared to pour in more, if only those glorious coats and body parts could have been his. The consignment to China was to leave in less than a month’s time; and now there was hardly any time left. He had targeted the tigress alone, but had been overjoyed to learn of the poisoned death of two of the cubs as well. Baby tiger skins were just as coveted in the global animal parts market. Unmarred by any bullet or weapon wounds, as he had precisely planned, the tiger skins would have been worth a fortune in the murky marketplaces he operated in.

 “I will not give up!” growled the Contractor, punctuating each word with a hard pound on the table before him. “Never!” he snarled, hitting the table with such force that it sent his cut glass tumbler crashing to the floor. The sound of smashed glass brought him back to his senses, and he pulled back the mask of deceptive geniality over his murderous features in an instant. He noticed the pending paperwork that had flown out of the table with the tumbler, and now lay among the shattered glass shards. He bent down to carefully pick up the papers, brushing the glass bits off them.

He had to concentrate on what lay ahead; and that was his contract for extending part of the National Highway that skirted through the district to run along part of the forest zone. The work was almost completed. After years of opposition from various quarters, he had finally inveigled his way in through well-placed sources and the help of various other quarters that supported his move. A National Highway almost kissing a forest buffer zone held many different implications and opportunities, offering access to resources that much of the nation neither realised nor much cared about. It was this very ignorance and apathy that men like the Contractor fed upon, and flamed.

There was a pressing formality, however, that needed immediate attention. Official paperwork and certifications had to be processed by the Forest Department for the impending closure of the Highway project, it was important that these be looked into without much delay. He was in rather a hurry to conclude all formalities and leave at the soonest. There was already too much talk doing the rounds. Not that they would ever be linked back to him conclusively; no, that was never a possibility as far as he was concerned. But, nevertheless, he detested the unpleasantness of spectres and whispered doubts shadowing him yet again. It was enough of an anomaly for him to be present anywhere near the scene of operations. He had already broken a rule.

There was also a longstanding personal invitation from the Chief Conservator that had not been taken up.

***

Timur—T-25 for the tiger census team—was so called because his coat was as resplendent and his size almost as gigantic as a Siberian tiger. Some said he was an offspring of a rehabilitation experiment, when they had tried to release two Siberians, bred in captivity, out into the wild. This was around the time when circus animals were banned from performances; and circus companies across the land were sending their animals to zoos, unable to bear their expenses. One such circus manager from Chennai had signed up for a conservation experiment with two of his star ex-performers. Having been bred in captivity, however, the two Siberian tigers did not take too well to the dry and dusty Central Indian forest; and died within six months of their release to freedom and liberty. But not before at least one of the Russian Steppe land Czars had mated with an Indian Queen.

Timur came from that strain of Siberian genealogy, it was widely believed. That brief trans-continental encounter had somehow changed the colour palette of a patch of green oasis within a burnt sienna landscape. For alongside a batch of ebony and gold stripes also lived a set of bigger and brighter cousins.

His lineage on his mother’s side was equally impressive. His mother was the daughter of one of the longest living tigresses in the wild. His grandmother had lived for almost 18 years; and her fight with a 14-foot crocodile was still the stuff of legends in the jungle. His mother, Begum, had inherited some of that feisty spirit, as had Timur. Begum, who had got her name from the crown-shaped marking on her forehead, had lorded it over the jungle in her time. She had been a wonderful mother too, raising four litters successfully to maturity, and barely losing two of her cubs in her lifetime. She had provided for them, she had taught them how to hunt—and above all, she had taught her children to survive the jungle on top of the food chain. In all, she had raised nine cubs, four males and five females. Three of them had even been relocated to neighbouring forests to repopulate them with tigers.

Timur had been one of them. He had never learnt why his family and familiar landscape had vanished overnight. Away from his mother, his siblings, and the familiar forest territory that he had shared with them. The strong liana creepers that he dangled from as a cub; his mother’s beautifully striped tail that she let him fool around with now and then; his brothers and sisters with whom he roughed and tumbled it; playing tag with the light and shade of the sun’s rays as they filtered through the forest canopy; the touch of elephant grass, and the sound of flowing water—all disappearing in a flash he knew not why, a mystery left unsolved for him till the very end.

And his extraordinary tale, which had been whispered and howled about for many years among jungle folk, had been born of this sudden alienation—for he had once fathered two orphaned tiger cubs after their mother’s death. An anomaly among tigers. They were not his cubs, and neither had the mother been one of his many mates. And yet he had hunted for them, protected them from rival males in neighbouring territories, and raised them to adulthood. Some say he had spied them from among his thick bamboo grove when poachers had carted away their mother’s dead body. Maybe Timur had sensed the distress of the young orphans, their plight triggering distant memories of his own; and he had adopted the two tiny orphans. So they say.

They also said that one of those orphans had been Noor, who was later to inhabit a prime water front territory by the now dry watering hole, which was part of Timur’s larger domain. That was where she lived with her four cubs; and it was at the edge of this territory, by a murky pool of water that also skirted a part of the newly tarred Highway, that her poisoned dead body had been found along with those of two of her cubs.

***

A forest guard thought he recognised the Contractor when he walked into the Chief Conservator’s office. With nothing but Baghin Noor and her cubs on his mind lately, the guard could not believe that his prime suspect would just walk in and let himself up this easily!

The Conservator was equally surprised at the entry of his unexpected guest. Rising from his desk, he politely asked the Contractor to make himself comfortable; and promptly sent off the attending forest guard to arrange for refreshments, sensing his dangerous mood.

“You need not have bothered over this trivial matter Chandani Saab, you could easily have sent in the paperwork through someone else. In any case, it is all in order for the most part. There’s just a small clarification we’re awaiting from the NHAI.”

“You embarrass me Mr. Sen, this is hardly any trouble. Besides, I had to take you up on your invitation, remember?”

“You are absolutely right in bringing up that old invitation! But not here, and certainly not in this manner! Come home with me for dinner tonight Chandani Saab? If you have the time, of course; and meanwhile, I shall get my men to process all the necessary papers. What do you say?”

“Excellent! How can I refuse? And especially since I’m leaving town tomorrow. My work here is over you see,” the Contractor added, smiling.

“In which case, we must make doubly sure to tie-up all loose ends,” said the Conservator, smiling back.

And so the two men left for the Conservator’s bungalow. Conversation soon followed good food and wine; and the host had high hopes of his guest letting down his guard. Cleverly and slowly the conversation was eased towards life in the jungle; and then progressively towards extinct and endangered animals.

Unseen by the two, however, a storm began to gather outside. The sprawling forest bungalow was cradled by trees all around it. What had begun with a gentle breeze, gathered strength by the hour. The dusky evening sky became gradually overcast with rain clouds; but the men noticed none of this, so intricately entwined were they in words…

“So you honestly feel that endangered animals do not need our protection?” prodded the Conservator, a glint in his eye.

“On the contrary Mr. Sen, I think *we* need protection *from* them!’ laughed out the Contractor, ‘Why take the case of tigers, for instance, didn’t you read the papers today? We may be sending them to Cambodia very soon!”

And so saying, he pointed at the daily lying on a table nearby. “*Tiger population up 22% in 6 years: Most Big Cats in Wild are in India*”, one of the headlines read.

A deafening clap of thunder interrupted them just then. Getting up, the men looked out of the open windows. “Looks like a nasty storm brewing Mr. Sen, I think I should get going now.”

The tree tops of the guava and mango grove by the bungalow had begun to toss about. The air smelt of an impending storm. The Conservator stood on his veranda with an unfathomable expression as the car backed out of the driveway. His guest had been a hard nut to crack; and was in all probability never going to come within his network of influence ever again…

***

The day was rapidly losing light as the car sped through the newly tarred Highway that cut through the forest. Twigs, leaves and dust balls landed on the wind shield and it became increasingly difficult to watch the road ahead. Trees on either side of the Highway seemed to have found a life of their own. As though they were getting closer—as if roots and branches were moving in on the speeding car from either side. And as the wind whipped up a squall, the birds and animals seemed to grow quieter in contrast.

The Contractor spied a *barasingha* with its magnificent antlers standing immobile beneath a banyan, curtained off by its overhanging roots. A peacock stood like a stone, its indigo-green tail-feathers fanned out. Pairs of parakeets were perched silently on dry teak branches, not moving a beak. The Contractor imagined them all to be gazing intently at his speeding car. The entire scene unnerved him. The immobile seemed to have turned mobile with a vengeance, as the agile fell inactive. And for once, the habitual hunter felt like the hunted.

And then the rain came. First in fat, isolated droplets; and then in blinding sheets. That did not stop the raging wind, however, and together the elements danced across the Highway that had cleaved the forest. The wind and the rain lashed at the dry and brittle tree trunks. Now completely unnerved, the Contractor instructed his chauffer to drive on as fast as possible.

Meanwhile, daylight disappeared completely; and as a flash of lightning cracked across the sky, a couple of deadwood fell down in a heap along the forest floor. Nature directed a violent orchestra all her own; and as the notes reached a crescendo, both men watched in horror as a huge branch attached to a massive tree trunk came crashing down on them. But before being enveloped in darkness, the Contractor saw a pair of phosphorescent eyes glowing in the middle of the road right ahead of them.

The next morning local villagers found a mangled mess of metal that lay crushed under a massive tree trunk that had been uprooted in the storm the night before. The driver’s lifeless form lay trapped inside; but the door behind his seat had been wrenched out and lay a few feet beyond the wreckage. No one else was visible in the vicinity. This was the scene that greeted a group of forest guards and Highway officials who had come round to clear the blocked road of all storm debris.

Recognising the car, a forest guard began to hunt for the Contractor. About six yards from the site, by the forest line to the right, he found fresh footprints and a shoe sunk in the mud. But his blood ran cold at the sight of something else besides. A trail of adult, male pug marks led into the dense forest beyond. Curiously enough, however, the guard called off the search; staring into the depths of the jungle with a strange look on his face.

***

As he let Noor’s cubs feast on the fresh human carcass beside a dry water hole, Timur ambled up to a Flame of the Forest that stood nearby—aflame amid the rain-washed forest terrain. He luxuriously urinated all along its trunk with his tail held high like a victorious battle flag, before scratching his bloody claws down the crocodile bark of another tree alongside.

Timur had marked his territory. And trespassers were not allowed. 

