From: Subbaram Danda<subbaram8000@yahoo.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: The Game Changer
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Rishita had admirable qualifications – M.Tech. in Information Technology and M.Phil. in Cyber Security Management. She held a well-paid job in a multinational corporation. Her looks captivated everyone. She was bold but not brash, quick-witted but not quirky. She wanted to lead a modern, unfettered life. Yet, she respected her highly conservative and obstinately ritualistic parents. She would not like to go against their wishes.

Rishita turned 26. Her parents started looking for an alliance for her, their only daughter. It was already late. On an auspicious day her father approached a well-known marriage broker and collected some horoscopes of possible grooms, shelling out Rs.5,000 for them.

He consulted an astrologer famous in their locality. His fee was Rs.1,000 for the first visit with a charge of Rs.300 for every subsequent call. The astrologer studied Rishita’s horoscope intently. His face turned grim. He paused for a while and then said, “The horoscope bristles with malefic planetary configurations. Consequently, her life after marriage will not be a happy one. In short, the boy marrying her will have a pre-mature death.”

Rishita’s father was shocked. Looking at his fear-stricken face, the astrologer advised him, “Don’t lose heart. Astrology has a solution for every such situation. We have to look for a boy whose horoscope has similar inimical factors. I will help you in picking one such. You have got to be patient.” He then went through the horoscopes brought from the broker and rejected them one by one. “Can you bring some more? Let us keep searching.”

The news produced little reaction in Rishita. She did not care for the astrologer’s words but to please her parents she kept quiet.

After a few days, the broker provided some more horoscopes to Rishita’s father and collected more money. The astrologer, this time too, rejected all of them. “There are people, who have been coming to me for years. Keep your fingers crossed. There is no other go,” he told him. The process of visiting the astrologer continued without any break and without any results.

Two years passed. At the office, Rishita had brilliant tidings. She received “outstanding” rating for her performance every year. Her boss offered to send her to the United States for a month-long orientation. But her parents stood in the way and said assertively, “Your marriage is our first priority. Get married and go anywhere you like. We want it to be on traditional lines. We don’t want any adventures.”

At Rishita’s office the common dining hall was the bee hive of all gossip. The latest piece of news was that her senior colleague Mohan had been deserted by his long time fiancée. She was forced by her parents to marry a man of their choice. Since then he had become depressed and was not mingling with others freely. “This is the fate of a really decent person,” many employees commented.

Rishita’s father maintained his errands to the astrologer. But the outcome remained the same. On the advice of a neighbour he changed the astrologer. The new man suggested a propitiating ritual to be performed by Rishita. He wanted her to light a lamp at the idol of Mars in any shrine of “Navagrahas” (nine planets) on nine Tuesdays. Reluctantly, she complied with it. But, nothing emerged out of it.

Rishita’s father registered her biodata and horoscope with a leading matrimonial bureau. There was not much of a response. “People are scared of her horoscope,” was the ostensible reason cited. Following a friend’s suggestion, she wore two special gem-studded rings. Nothing came out of it. Her father responded to matrimonial advertisements in newspapers. It did not help either.

Two more years rolled by. Rishita was disenchanted.

To unfathom her predicament, she met a reputed psychologist, who was also a sociologist. Providing him with her biodata, she told him, “My father has been looking for an alliance for me for the past several years without any success. According to astrologers, people shun me because of malefic planetary configurations in my horoscope. Is there any scientific basis for what the astrologers say?”

He took a close look at her. She was charmingly good-looking, well-educated and decently employed. It was a pity that she was not getting married.

He replied, “I am reminded of the German dictator Adolf Hitler’s famous dictum – Tell a lie again and again. Blow it big. Eventually people will accept it. It becomes the gospel truth. Even assuming that a particular prediction is a conjecture, repeated pronouncements will make it sound true. People will believe it and never bother to ascertain its veracity scientifically. They are not prepared to take risks, especially when somebody’s life is presumably at stake. The easiest option for them is to look elsewhere. They can choose some other girl.”

Rishita wanted to probe further. She called on a well-known spiritual guru. Without mincing words, she asked him, “Swamiji, is there any divine sanction behind predictions? Why do astrologers link Gods and temples with their predictions?”

The guru replied with a smile, “No astrological prediction can be construed as God’s prophesy. It is not ordained by God. There is no guarantee that a particular prediction will come true. Astrology is different and temple worship is different. Sincere prayer to God, coupled with good behaviour, will certainly mitigate any hardship.”

Rishita felt relieved.

At her office Mohan regained his old composure and started mixing with all as usual. “This is not the end of the world,” he appeared to convey. An elderly lady colleague of Rishita, with whom she had shared her matrimonial melancholies, suggested that she could consider marrying him. “He is a gem, take my word. He insists on no horoscopes, nothing.” But, Rishita did not like the idea of marrying a man, who had already loved somebody else.

One more year passed without any development on her matrimonial front. On returning home one evening, she noticed a pair of sandals in front of the closed doors of her apartment. She could vaguely hear the voices of people talking inside. She strained herself to catch the conversation.

The visitor was her uncle. Her father was speaking. “Next week Rishita will turn 31. Unfortunately, no alliance is materializing for her. We have been scouting for five long years. In fact, I am getting fed up with this monstrous hunt.”

Her uncle interjected, “True, let us face the realities of the situation. God appears to have ordained her to remain single. Let her be so. Marriage is not the be all and end all of life. There are several middle-aged women in our neighbourhood who are not married. You and your wife should also have somebody to look after you in your twilight years. Moreover, you are a retired person without much income now. Her earnings will be of help to you.”

Her father: “I am also getting inclined to think on these lines.” At this stage, Rishita knocked on the door. Her mother opened it. Next moment her uncle left the place after greeting her gingerly.

That night Rishita could not sleep. Her present predicament haunted her. Propitiation rituals and gems were of no use. People’s blind faith in what astrologers said appeared unshakable. She recalled the conversation between her father and her uncle. Tears swelled in her eyes. The last words of her father proved to be the last straw on the camel’s back. In a flash she decided, “No more horoscopes and no more astrologers.”

Rishita’s dissent was final. She mustered courage and mentally prepared herself to do everything to break the gridlock.

She marshalled her crisis management skills. True, several negative factors were working against her. At the same time, she was not totally helpless. There were a few bright factors, which she could mobilize to her advantage -- her good educational background, her official track record, possibility of a new foreign assignment, money in her savings account and a few good friends.

Next day in her office, shortly before lunch time, there was a call from her director. “Would you mind seeing me for a minute?” With trepidation she met him. He told her, “I have good news for you. You have been selected for a year-long project in London. I know in the past you rejected a foreign assignment. The present one you should not turn down in your career’s interest. We have selected Mohan also for a similar parallel position there. Let me know by tomorrow.”

Thoughts bombarded Rishita’s mind at lightning speed. She felt her parents had imprisoned her within the four walls of their rigid conservatism and blind beliefs. They could not find a suitable match for her. Neither would they allow her to seek her life-partner herself. They had prevented her from going to a foreign country alone even once. Yet, she loved and obeyed them sincerely, but how long could she put up with their impractical ways.

At once she replied, “Yes sir, I accept the offer. Thanks a lot.” He was surprised at her instant response. “Okay. I am arranging for the necessary papers. After visa formalities, you will be leaving next week. Good luck!”

Rishita knew that Mohan would also be flying with her. He was a decent guy. But, she would like to keep him at a respectable distance.

A week rolled by fast. At the airport, as Rishita’s parents waved her “good bye,” tears swelled in their eyes. She remained stoic. But on board the aircraft she wept uncontrollably. Mohan, who sat next to her, tried to console her but she remained indifferent.

In London, they stayed in two adjacent studio-type flats. Mohan picked her up daily and drove her to office in a car he had hired. Rishita never assisted him in anything, as that would mean sending wrong signals to him. Once, when she fell ill, he abstained from going to office, took her to the doctor and looked after her.

Meanwhile, Rishita’s parents started sending her e-mails from a browsing centre and kept her informed of developments at home. Her responses were few and far between.

One day she received an e-mail that startled her. They had located an alliance for her in London itself. The horoscopes of the two matched well. They wanted her to agree to the proposal.

Rishita was in a dilemma. On the one hand, she was in no mood to accept horoscope-based alliances. On the other, she was not prepared to remain single lifelong. What was the course open to her?

She called Mohan and invited him to tea at a restaurant in the vicinity that evening. She told him she wanted to discuss an important matter. Surprisingly, there she proposed to him and he accepted willingly. Here was a person, she reasoned, who cared for her unsolicited and unselfishly, despite her cold-shouldering him.

Rishita-Mohan wedding took place in an Indian temple in the presence of their close friends. She e-mailed her wedding photos to her parents with a message, “I know I am breaking conventions, which did no good to me. I have become a dissenting daughter of yours. Excuse me. I am confident I will lead a happy life with Mohan, despite the malefic afflictions in my horoscope. Certainly, God will be on my side.”

One evening the newly-married couple took a stroll on a promenade by the *Thames.* The majestically flowing river and the beauty of the scattered clouds above glowing in shades of crimson set their thoughts soaring. They recalled their immediate past. Both of them were victims of circumstances, brought about by unflinching adherence of their elders to archaic practices.

The two reckoned that there would be thousands of disenchanted persons like them suffering silently. “This cannot go on,” they averred. “It should change. Something should be done. God, show us the way,” they prayed silently.

On completion of their foreign assignment the two returned to India. Soon, they set up an organization -- Research Institute for Matrimonial Compatibility. One of its special programmes was a free service to evaluate, through stringent psychological tests, compatibility of alliance-seeking man and woman for a lasting marital relationship. It also insisted on blood tests for the prospective bride and the groom to rule out existence of AIDS and other life-threatening diseases in them. It further recommended Police verification of their antecedents.

Within a year the institute became the talk of the town. Television channels praised it for its path-breaking social activism and hailed its programme as “a noble service par excellence.” Rishita and Mohan received a leading newspaper’s award for being the “best social reformers of the year.” 

