From: Sathish Pendharker<satishpendharkar@yahoo.co.in>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Far Away From Home
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Getting down from the taxi, I stood before the window of the left rear-door. Mr Turner who was sitting on the rear-seat handed me thirty dollars and on noticing the frown on my face gave me another ten. Thrilled, I waved him goodbye and danced my way to the imposing structure of the Gateway of India. For, it was not often that I got compensated in such a handsome manner for acting as a tourist guide. I admit that I did cadge that extra ten dollars from him. But then I do not have any compunction swindling foreigners who are well off. I consider it legitimate for a needy, fourteen-year old like me who does not have a single relative in this megalopolis. 

Perhaps it was written in my destiny that I would land up in Mumbai. How else could a boy then studying in the seventh standard in a municipal school in Jaunpur suddenly end up in the city of dreams 1500 kms away? I was leading a normal life. I had two brothers and a sister, a doting mother and a father who toiled as a farm labourer by day and got drunk and unleashed his pent-up fury on us by night. It was my mother who bore this brunt most of the time for the moment my father started beating us, she would intervene. One day, father came back from work at the usual time and demanded that he be served dinner immediately. My brothers and sister had gone out to play and I was in the house with my mother. My mother, who had already prepared the dinner, began serving him hot chapatis. As soon as he took the first bite, he became red in the face. “There’s no salt in the bloody bhendi!” he yelled. My shocked mother managed, “Oh, no! But…But I remember putting salt…” “You whore! You don’t pay attention these days!” screamed my father flinging his steel plate at her. It slammed into her right temple lacerating it in the process. A fountain of blood spewed forth. I tried to rush to her aid but my father had grabbed my hand. I glowered at him. “Don’t you dare stare at me like that!” he thundered. This was too much for me to bear. Biting him, I freed myself from his grasp and picking up the rolling pin hit him on the head with it. He screamed clutching his head in agony. My mother- jolted out of her dazed state – began crawling towards him. Before she reached him, he had fainted. Blood was gushing out of my mother’s wound yet she was panicking as to the condition of father. Some neighbours knocked at our door to ascertain what was going on. She shooed them away and then proceeded to bandage herself. While we were taking father to the dispensary I suggested to mother that we abandon father. She was aghast at my suggestion. That night, when the whole house was asleep, I departed. 

Mumbai is referred to as the city of dreams. But nightmares were all I saw in the first few days. I slept on filthy pavements whose concrete had been reduced to rubble. I did whatever work came my way. To stave off hunger, I occasionally rummaged through garbage-heaps at times competing with stray dogs to locate discarded food. 

One day, I was caught by a foreigner in the process of trying to pick-pocket him. I thought that this was it. He would hand me over to the police. They would beat me up, put me in a remand home and locate my parents. I saw the castle of my dreams crumble. But to my surprise, the foreigner did not even reprimand me. Instead asked me a lot of questions such as how much I earned and where I was staying and whether I got enough to eat throughout the day. At the end of the brief interview he surprised me by saying, 

“Suraj, you resemble a skeleton…But don’t worry…From now onward, you are under my care”. 

He was an Englishman named Edwin Nurse and he offered me shelter at a place he called “Blue Heaven”. There were five other boys there, all about the same age as me. We had one thing in common: we had all run away from our homes. That night, Edwin Nurse threw a party in my honour. I had never seen so much food in my life. There was mutton biryani, butter naan, prawn masala, and vegetable korma. I ate like a pig. I also - on the insistence of my benefactor – tasted liquor for the first time in my life. The feeling of empowerment it provided a village bumpkin like me was enough to get drunk on. 

That night Edwin Nurse violated me. In my drunken state, I was not fully aware of what was going on but afterwards as I lay down on my bed, I felt a sense of shame consume my senses. I was desperate to share my pain with my fellow-boarders but they had turned their faces away from me and were either fast asleep or pretending to be so. I spent the night tossing and turning in my bed. The next morning when the caretaker handed me my breakfast, I flung the egg-parathas at him. Later that day Edwin Nurse met me. Stamping the floor repeatedly, I shouted, “You filthy bastard!” “Suraj”, he said calmly, “You must not feel guilty about activities of this type which are natural and what’s more, part of the learning process”. “I will report you to the police”, I threatened him. Catching hold of my collar he warned, “If you do Suraj, I’ll tell them about how you to tried to pickpocket me”. Over the next few weeks, I was to learn that the other boys tolerated the frequent abuses for various reasons. One of them named Bhanu confessed, “My chacha repeatedly abused me causing me to flee my home…The difference is that here I don’t go hungry”. Edwin Nurse made sure that he gifted us with goodies now and then – sunglasses, new clothes and one-day outings to Lonavala and Alibag. 

My being well-fed and well-looked after could not prevent my being gnawed from within by the monster of emptiness. Whenever I went outdoors for a stroll, I felt like leaping into the Arabian Sea or jumping off a multi-storied building. One day, when I was walking on Arthur Bunder road, I saw a taxi-driver pass some snide remarks at a girl in school-uniform. Enraged, I rushed to him and began beating him. A crowd soon gathered. He was forced to apologize to the girl. The girl thanked me profusely. Her name was Jaya and she was the daughter of a domestic help who lived in the Servant Quarters of a nearby building. Strangely, I found it difficult to communicate with her. I felt terribly inadequate. We would run into each other occasionally. She would ask me why I had stopped studying or chide me for smoking. With the passage of time I found it easier to converse with her. She was the first girl I took a fancy to. 

Edwin Nurse continued exploiting us with gay abandon. On several occasions he would make us strip and then photograph us. Once in a month some foreign tourists would drop by and after showering us with gifts, extract their pound of flesh. 

One day, Prakash, my closest friend, reported the story of the sordid goings-on at Blue Heaven to the police. The Police raided the place. I was not there at the time. They arrested Edwin Nurse and the caretaker. They took charge of the four other boys and after recording their statements, sent them to a children’s home run by the Government where Prakash too was now staying. I had the option of requesting that I too be admitted to a children’s home but I chose to rough it out on the streets. A couple of days’ later, I read that Edwin Nurse and the caretaker had been let off on bail. However, Edwin Nurse was now forced to stay at Blue Heaven since he had been thrown out of his apartment by the Parsi gentleman who owned it. 

I was eating a vada-pav near the Bombay Stock Exchange when out of the blue, Prakash bumped into me. He looked haggard as a result of both exhaustion and worry. 

“Suraj, I’ve been searching for you for days… Ever since I escaped from the children’s home in fact…” 

“Prakash, you mean… No wonder you look so rundown”. 

“Suraj, I don’t have time to explain…I feared they would poison me there…But there’s an important thing I’ve to hand over to you - a photo album about Blue Haven…I handed over everything else to the cops but kept this…I fear that they may destroy this if I give it to them…You keep it and give it to them at an appropriate time”. 

I began to tremble like a leaf in a storm. “But...But Prakash… It’s dangerous…” 

“Do it for my sake, Suraj…please”. 

He handed over the album at a secret place the next day. That was to be our last meeting. After two days I read that his body had been found on the railway tracks near Mahim station. Now the onus was on me to undertake the task he had entrusted to me so that his soul could rest in peace. 

I carefully made some plans and then phoned Edwin Nurse. Speaking in an unrecognizable voice I told him that if he came to the apartment where he was staying earlier at 5 PM that evening, he could retrieve a photo album from therein. Minutes later, from another telephone booth I phoned the DCP of Zone 1. 

At 4.30 PM I went to the apartment and removed the lock from the latch of the door. This would facilitate Edwin Nurse opening the lock of the main door to which he already had a key. I had told him the Parsi gentleman would be away at that time for an hour. In fact, the Parsi gentleman had gone to Pune and would be back only tomorrow evening. I then took my position on the staircase about two floors above from where I could see the passage leading to the apartment. It was an old four-storey building which did not have an elevator. I had to ensure that no one saw me and if they did, I would have to pretend to be looking for someone’s apartment. I could also not afford to let the police sight me. For, they would probably recognize me from photos as the boy who was not present during the raid on Blue Heaven. 

At exactly five, I saw Edwin Nurse entering the passage. He paused for a moment before gingerly walking to the door. Not wanting to be seen, I crouched and heard the click of the door being opened. Immediately thereafter, I heard the door being closed softly. I got up slowly and looked towards the door. Two men, having entered the passage were now heading for the door. I recognized one of them as a cop in the Colaba Police Station. They were both dressed in plainclothes. One of them rang the bell. Mission accomplished, I carefully yet swiftly made my way downstairs. 

I had barely stepped out into the street when the skies opened up. Now, I had neither an umbrella nor a care in the world. Therefore, I started dancing. Moments later, I spotted Jaya taking shelter under the awning of a grocery shop. I called out to her to join me. She refused, shaking her head and also signaled that I had gone nuts. I laughed saying I had and begged her to join me. To my surprise, she did. Dancing, I led her away from there – far away from lurking danger. 

