From: Zephyr Hussain<zephyrhussain@gmail.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Music From the Record
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Music from the record veiling the sounds of the night- but hear, hear! Oh that is a cricket vocalizing it’s tale of the dying day, perhaps? I think it has had a good day; the smiling sound! And I just lie here, with happy eyes and content mind reminiscing the fallen petals of a once full-in-bloom flower that still breathed on in the memory lanes, still casting spells with its enchanting scent, so many a times drowning me in ecstatic colours that are now too bright for the eyes that have seen too much and for too long a time.

I would spend days dreaming away. Dreams, a whole lot of them. A dreamer is too nice a word to describe me. The maze of my mind had always envisaged heinous longings and there was this undeniable pleasure in doing so. The clocks never seemed to take time off their tedious job as time, in all its mystery, took me far away from myself until one day- and that is the day I like to call the day I was reborn- I looked into the mirror and saw what I was not. It would only be years later when it dawned on me that my old self had never been me. Who I was before my rebirth was a distant memory. An illusion I had merely just existed in. The night is dark and it gets darker after midnight; in the dark when it gets hard to see, I find myself. Slithering out of myself-raw and vulnerable- there was contentment in the purity of darkness and the purity of fresh birth and the purity of nakedness.

The book that helped me find myself spoke to me through the night. We fell into shushed conversation, the book and I. Oh it was a journey, the night. What destination awaited me I did not know, but I seemed to hardly care; the journey revealed myself to me. The words created me and the syntax trapped me; there I was- dancing across the pages, hiding behind weaved imagery, whispering secrets and shame. And by morning light as crystalline droplets hung on to sleeping greens and, blue and yellow and white spread through the winter sky, I had achieved communion with the book. We were one, we were the same. I often go back to think of the morning that followed my metamorphosis. Everything was sprinkled with a new light, everything wore a brand new garment I had never seen before. I wondered if that is how babies look at the world around them- naive and curious and fearful, or, fearless? I recall there was this part towards the end of the book- no, I can’t seem to remember what it said- I recall there was this part towards the end of the book that had caused tears and fury. It had exposed myself to me- with such truth it was laden I could not come to accept it. I saw me; it was like a mirror reflection. I am sorry I cannot remember what it had exactly said.

-----

“Doctor! She is gaining consciousness” a croaky female voice from somewhere towards my left- or perhaps right? - exclaimed. My head felt like someone was constantly hammering it from the back. My vision wasn’t helping either; a blurry jumble of faces peered down at me and bright white lights screamed from behind them- oh the cruel lights! They stung my eyes and I shut them, trying hard to fathom what all of this meant. But a dizzy darkness was the answer I received.

I rubbed my perspiration coated forehead with the yellowed edge of the blanket as my breath slowly returned to its normal rhythm. Silence otherwise, not one sound. Ten to fifteen minutes passed, I lay in the same position. Another five minutes passed and I hadn’t moved yet. Anxiety molded into helplessness as I stared at the ceiling fan dressed with woven cobwebs. I reached for my phone that sat next to a lonely pillow; neither had she called nor dropped a message. When would she come and take me home with her? I don’t like this place. I have a feeling that this place- this room with scarce furniture and many paintings- conspires against me. I wake up in the dead of the night and can almost hear the curtains whispering their disapproval of me as they sway with the chilly night breeze. I think they don’t like having me here.

Waiting for the familiar strangeness of the sound, knowing it was just moments before the waiting ears’ wait would finally be over. I tossed over into a new, more comfortable position, the bed creaking under my weight, the weight of my thoughts? My lazy eyelids open and shut as a piercing yellow beam of light shot through the dust adorned window glass from somewhere near the unchanging scene outside. Often as I lay here and let my eyes scan the outside I wondered how the surroundings- the trees, the old buildings with sad paint chipping off them like leaves falling from a dead tree, the dusty rooftop of a house eyesight did not permit seeing, the new naked unpainted buildings- led a tedious most monotonous life, a life where changes were a rare visitor. And when they did visit once in a while, it was in awe and fear that they were welcomed, if welcomed at all. When the shrieks of the silent night become unbearable, I took the pills and glass from the bedside table and gulped them down. Within minutes, my racing mind slowed down as the world faded out and I fell into a deep, dreamless sleep.

“She keeps on mentioning her sister”.

“But how is that possible, doctor? She never had any sibling”.

“I know. Her mother was a very dear friend of mine”, said Dr. Kim as her eyes darted to and from where Eli lay staring up at the ceiling and the medical report in her hand. “She says she will wait for her sister to come and take her home. She closed the file in her hand and sighed, “She holds a firm belief”.

“What is this supposed to mean then?”

Dr. Kim looked at Mille with tired eyes and flashed a grave smile, “I think it was a good idea, after all, to start giving her the medication early. Her case might prove fatal if not handled carefully. I am doing my best to bring her out of the illusion she has been living in since her parents’ death. Poor child…”, she trailed off as Mille tried to sink in everything that had been thrown at her.

“It’s me, Eli, my dear. Wake up”. I knew that soft whispering voice only too well. I threw open my eyes, and embraced her as I wept into her chest.

“Sister, my sister! Why did you not come for me sooner? I don’t like this place. Please take me away. Please take me away with you.”

“I have to go away Eli. I’m no longer capable of staying with you.”

And all of a sudden it was as if a rift had opened between us and I struggled to hold on to the edge as she moved away further and further into the valley of no return. I cried out to her but she wouldn’t hear of me, she did not care. I held out my hand, begged her to take me away with her, “Sister! My sister, my dear sister! Please don’t leave me alone”. She stared at me with eyes of steel but turned a deaf ear to my painful cries. I felt myself wilt under her stare as the ground beneath me devoured me in and I fell into a hollow vacuum.

“I’m leaving you”, were the last words I heard as my last vision of gave away to darkness.

-----

It was the third night after my parents’ funeral. As a storm raged on outside, I lay curled up n their bed with my face buried in a sleepless pillow. That is when she had whispered into my ears, “Elli, my dear, I am here for you”. I cried into her chest and she consoled me all night. “Elli, my dear, cry tonight to your heart’s content; let out everything battling inside of you all these years. Don’t you worry dear, let it spill out”, she whispered to me as I broke into trembling sobs, letting the tears flow, and flow…Her words calmed my soul; it had this spell-binding quality. That night she gave me the love I had never received before. I had my sister, I was not alone. She promised never to abandon me like everyone else had. I was not alone. She assured me she would guide me with each step I take from then on. She promised me she would stay. Always. I had my sister. I was not alone.

Cheat! My sister…cheat! Cheat! My sister, my dear sister…

My head spun violently- a tornado of aching thoughts and dusty memories. “My dear sister…”, my voice that sound like my voice was hoarse but it didn’t matter, “Find her! My sister! Cheat! Take me to my sister!” a persistent violent throbbing inside my head made me flinch with every word that escaped my mouth but it didn’t matter, “Cheat! Chea-“

Darkness.

-----

I was back on my parents’ bed- it was the same bed, it felt the same, it smelled the same. But it was only the bed; the room was gone, the other furniture had vanished and the ceiling, the ceiling too was gone- too bad, I longed to try to decipher the meaning of the mysterious patterns painted on the fan by dust that had accumulated over the years. Now all around everything was but white. A blinding, screaming white. The white knew no boundaries; it spilled out but also closed in. It gave me wings but also suffocated me. And then as if it was the emptiness speaking, a soft whisper reached my ears, “You are not alone”.

-----

"Silent eyes that spoke so much

Lips that part but…eh?

Only the stillness that had life

Silent eyes and silent self

Stoic and cold and immovable

A story untold,

A song unsung,

Just empty words wandering meaningless

Until, one fine day,

When maybe,

Maybe, they find home,

Home…ah!

A desire until then

When-

A story untold, finally told A song unsung, finally sung." 

