From: Devika Rajan<devikarajan@yahoo.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Moment or Truth
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

*Bengaluru, India: 1st Aug, 2015*
The doorbell rang, slicing through the silence. Syed opened the door, as
Amina, his mother, seated at the dining table, pale and dazed, brightened
momentarily. Then her face went back to its vacant expression.
They were police constables—from the Fraser Town Police station.
“Please come in,” said Syed.
Amina stood up. “Have you any news about my son?” she asked.
“No” said a constable, brusquely. “*You* come to the station NOW”--this to
Syed. “Our Saab has some questions for you”
“Yes, of course,” replied Syed. “Amma, I’ll be back, lock the door,” he
called out as he left.
Kumarappa, the station-in-charge looked up as the trio entered. Once
inside, the constables’ manner changed. They roughly pushed Syed towards
Kumarappa.
“So,” said Kumarappa, what information do you have?
“Information? What information will *I* have, Sir? I thought you had some
news” said Syed, his shoulders slumping. “Please Sir, we have not slept for
days. My Mother is sick with worry. Have you sent out a search party?”
“Search party? Search party!” The constables guffawed. “You are all a bunch
of terrorists! So, where is your brother? Tell us!”
“Sir, don’t say that,” Syed was upset, but tried not to show it. “We have
no idea where Aslam is. It is two weeks now and we have searched
everywhere. He is just a normal college student….” His voice trailed off.
“Okay, okay…” Kumarappa waved his hand dismissively. “I warn you; if he
doesn’t come back you’ll be in trouble. I give you one week. Call him back,
or else!” he made a menacing gesture…. Then, “Take him away, take him
away…” he nodded to the two constables.
Syed stood up, trembling. This time, he was not manhandled. He walked
towards the door. Once out, he staggered towards a street lamp, and
collapsed by it. He sat there, breathing in the cool evening air….for
five…perhaps it was ten, minutes. He wasn’t sure. Then, taking out his
mobile, he dialled a number… “Savitri, can I meet you *now*? Are you still
in the office? I need your help… your Dad’s help….”

*Palmyra, Syria: 13th Jan, 2016*
Aslam Khan was jolted out of sleep as the driver slammed the brakes of the
mini-truck. But he did not fall, hemmed in as he was by bodies, mostly
half-asleep and on their feet. The vehicle lurched and then stopped. He
heard someone swear. He could make out ‘fucking pig’ in Syrian-Arabic spat
out by Big-Guy-With-Thick-Lips. Big-Guy came over to the back and undid the
padlock. “Out!” he barked, and the thirty men, hands bound, chains linking
them, filed out. They were a motley crowd. Ten from North Africa, an equal
number from Syria and Iraq, and the rest from other parts of Asia, except
for two white British nationals, who spoke Arabic the best, though with a
strange accent. There was only one other from India, from U P. He was
stocky with a muscular upper body. He hadn’t spoken much in the last three
days, but conveyed his emotions by frequent spitting.
 The men stood by the side of the road, while two guards watched over them,
with rifles cocked. Aslam made no movement, being careful not to catch the
guards’ eyes, as that would result in a kick at his groin. But it was dark
now—no danger of that.  They halted for an hour as the truck was repaired.
Aslam needed to urinate; he did it carefully, drop by drop into his pants,
to ensure that no sound was heard, or that would have resulted in swift
reprisal…
The men were herded back into the truck. Dawn was streaming in ethereal
lines over the plains as they stopped by an open field. They were made to
kneel on the grass, facing the sun. A guard appeared with a video camera
and started rolling. Aslam was not sure what was happening behind him—he
dared not look. The tall Ethiopian next to him wept loudly…  Soon, he felt
a bag slip over his head; but his senses sharpened, and he listened
carefully. He heard some groans, but mainly whimpering, in between shouts
of ‘Allahu Akbar’. He felt a push and a sharp zing of pain went through his
left arm. Several images, unbidden, swept across the canvas of his mind—his
mother’s face, his brother--Syed ikka, driving to work, and ….that young
girl—he didn’t know her name—whom the soldiers had laughingly ravished, one
by one, and he too had pretended to do so…That was the first time he’d seen
a naked woman…
Suddenly, there was another shout of Allahu-Akbar, very close. He
started…as a flash of clear white light blinded his eyes, and darkness
descended….

*Bengaluru, India: 15th Jan, 2016 *
Savitri, seated at ‘their’ place in the coffee shop waiting for Syed,
wondered why he was late. Quite unlike him, she thought…  With nothing much
to do, her mind idly went over the three years that she had known him… she
remembered how she had first met him at a History Department lecture.  She,
being from the Law Faculty, was the outsider there. Syed, who had organised
the lecture, had later told her that he had been curious about the new face…

Drawn together by common interests, Savitri remembered how Syed and she had
become friends… eventually, a little more than just friends… Though they
had never talked of a future together. It was a tacit conformity to
unstated norms*.* After all, he was *SYED* and she—*SAVITRI*… Though
religion was not so important for either, it could not be dismissed too…

In these three years, Syed had completed his post-graduation and had
started teaching history at a local college. Savitri had graduated too, and
was interning with a small firm, polishing up her skills in criminal law.
The firm was run by fifty-ish and balding Mr. Wadia, who had a weakness for
the underdog…
After graduation, they continued to meet, once a week, at the coffee shop
on Thursday evenings. They rarely visited each other at home…It was the
crisis caused by the sudden disappearance of Aslam, that had brought her
closer to Syed. Savitri’s support to him was emotional as well as of a
practical nature. Her father, Sethuraman, an SP of police, whose brief
acquaintance with Syed, convinced him of the boy’s innocence, was the only
thing that stood between Syed and prison…
Through the glass, Savitri saw Syed parking his car; he entered the coffee
shop, and walked towards her.
 “What’s the matter?” Savitri asked, noticing the pale look on Syed’s face.
 “Order some coffee, please” his voice was steady.
Savitri gestured to the waiter.
“I think, we’ve found Aslam!” said Syed, his voice trembling. Then putting
his head on the table, he groaned. When he lifted it again, his eyes were
glistening.
Savitri leaned over and clasped Syed’s hands tight. “Is he…?” she did not
complete her question.
“We’re not sure it’s him. They killed him….” He added, abruptly.
In a trice, Savitri was up on her feet and on the other side of the table.
She put her hand around Syed as he started to weep uncontrollably. The
waiter rushed towards them with two glasses of water. He wondered what had
happened to this saab, the quiet, normally smiling man, who tipped
generously.
 “Who ‘they’?” asked Savitri. “Where is Aslam? SYED! WHAT’S HAPPENED? TELL
ME.”
“There’s a video put up half-a-hour back on u-tube. ISIS killed 30 of its
soldiers who deserted the army. There are two Indians; one of them….”
Syed’s voice broke again.
“What! O MY GOD!”
“We don’t know…They are enquiring. I have received a call from the police.  But
I wanted to tell you, first. They…the police… sounded nasty…” his voice
trailed off.
There was silence as Syed wiped his face with a tissue and sipped his
coffee. Savitri moved back to her side of the table. “Don’t worry. We’ll
see this through. I’ll give Mr. Wadia a call,” she said, taking out her
cell from her bag.
Suddenly, the glass doors of the coffee shop opened and shut with a crash.
There was the sound of stomping boots, as two policemen walked over to
Savitri and Syed’s table. There was minor bedlam as the waiter taking dosa
and cutting chai to table no 5, dropped his tray.
“Syed Khan, are you Syed Khan?” Asked constable number 1
“Yes, I am Syed Khan.”
“Syed Mohammed Khan, you are under arrest” declared constable number 2,
taking out a pair of rusted handcuffs.”
Savitri was on her feet. “Not so fast. Why are you arresting him?” she
demanded.
“Madam, these are police matters…Who are you?” sneered constable 1.
“I am Savitri Sethuraman, Syed Mohammed Khan’s lawyer.”
Constable 1 stopped sneering. “Madam, this is a serious matter. We have to
question him. We have orders from above.”
“Sure!” said Savitri. “Where are you taking him?”
“Fraser Town Police Station.” More roughly to Syed, “Come on… Don’t try
anything smart,” as he was half-dragged towards the police van.
Savitri hailed an Ola. “Fraser Town Police Station—make it quick”, her
voice was like a whiplash. Boarding the taxi, she proceeded to make a few
calls on her cell.
***

Once inside the van, it seemed to Syed that all hell had broken loose. A
constable snapped handcuffs on him, and then for good measure, kicked him
in the abdomen with a booted foot. Syed groaned and fell forward on to the
seat in front.
“So you think you can hide behind a lady?” barked the constable. “You pig…”
This was followed by a stream of abuse. Syed wasn’t sure what all the words
meant. But he wasn’t worried about that. He was only intent on protecting
himself as the blows rained on him. It seemed to him that this continued
for a very long time. But it was only around seven minutes, at the end of
which he lay in a little heap. A trickle of blood from the corner of his
right eye made its way down, to mingle with another that started at the
edge of his lower lip.
“Educated terrorist, son of a…..” continued the policeman as he kicked
Syed, again. “Don’t worry, we’ll despatch you to your brother...” Syed was
in a dazed limbo.
“Saar,” called out the driver. “Take it easy or we’ll be in trouble“. The
constable responded by lowering the glass and sending out a jet of spit.
***

Savitri, distraught but determined, sat before Kumarappa, in the Fraser
Town Police Station. “Madam,” he said, “You are Sethuraman Saar’s daughter.
Why are you getting mixed up in *this*?”
 “I am a lawyer. With Wadia and Wadia.”
 “Wadia? Okay, okay,” said Kumarappa.
 “Where is Syed Khan?” demanded Savitri with all the toughness she could
muster.
“In the lock-up… But I cannot allow you to meet him…”
“Why not?” demanded a voice from behind Savitri. And as she and Kumarappa
looked up, Wadia strode into the police station.
Saviitri turned towards Wadia. “Thank you, Sir, for coming so quickly,” She
said.
“That’s my job, Savitri.”
Barely had Wadia sat down, when another uniformed police official, a mild
looking man with glasses walked in. Kumarappa shot up from his seat and
saluted him, smartly. “Sir!”
“O Papa!” Savitri’s voice broke as she ran towards the newcomer. Sethuraman
deftly managed to return Kumarappa’s salute with his right hand, while with
his left he hugged his daughter, who looked like she might burst into tears
any moment.
 “What is happening? Why did you call me, here?” asked Sethuraman; the
question was partly to Kumarappa, partly to Savitri.
“Papa, they have arrested Syed.”
 “Why?” asked Sethuraman.
In the babble that followed, Sethuraman managed to piece the information
together. Finally he uttered, “This IS serious. They have to arrest him.
And I suggest you allow the law to take its own course.”
“Yes, I will, Papa,” replied Gayatri. “I will. But I have to know the cause
for arrest. You cannot punish someone for what his kin has done. Wadia Sir
and I are not budging till the bail formalities are over. We HAVE to meet
Syed.”
“That’s not a problem,” replied Kumarappa. “Come along…”
***

From where he sat, dazed and bruised, Syed looked up at the ring of faces.
There was Gayatri,  Sethuraman, Kumarappa, the now-nervous-looking
constable who had earlier beaten him up, and a balding, round faced man
sporting a white shirt with a starched lawyer’s collar—Wadia.
Gayatri spoke first. “We’ll get the matter cleared, Syed, she said. Don’t
worry. Aslam may be gone. But no-one will harm you. We will mourn his death
and we will see that you are okay, since you have done no wrong.” Then
turning to her father, “I understand that the law will take its course. But
I want you to know that this is the man I love, and I will do my best to
save him. Love will also take its course…”
Wadia beamed; Kumarappa’s jaw dropped; Sethuraman turned red in the face
while the police constable slunk out. Syed smiled to hear this first and
most public declaration of love from Savitri.  The thought occurred to him,
would he, ten years later, consider this as the most traumatic day of his
life? Or was it the happiest? Either way, it was certainly the most
significant.

