From: Maxwel Chhetry<maxwel.chhetry@gmail.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Maggu is Dead
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

“Where did you find these?”

“Under Pardesi’s cot”.

“What were you doing there?”

“I was hiding there last night?”

“From your father?”

“No, idiot! When we were playing hide and seek”

“But why did you pick them up? You went into his house to hide and stole stuff from under his cot?”

“Can’t you see they’re not his?”

“But he had them. Why didn’t you just ask him?”

“Of course. I could’ve just shaken him awake and said ‘Excuse me, but since I’m hiding under your cot without your permission, can I steal these too?’”

“Giddu says Pardesi pees in his sleep. Don’t hide there next time”.

“He didn’t pee last night and I don’t know about next time. What do we do with these now? I should’ve just shown them to someone else, not you.”

“Maybe….they gave it to him.”

Sattu looked at Chinki long and hard now. The same look he himself got from his father every time he tried to act smarter than he was allowed to and ended up saying something stupider than the last time. Like, ‘Look this branch is so strong it won’t break even if I hang from it’ and as if on cue the branch would snap and both Sattu and the branch would come crashing to the ground.

“Chinki,” he said slowly, reminding himself that he was talking to an oaf. “Look at these again. These are letters addressed *to* these people. That means someone wrote it to them and sent them here. And they’re all dated one year back. Which means Pardesi stole them all from the letter box”

“Why would he do that?”

“Because he’s a drunk. And an old fart. And sometimes mad. Everyone calls him names. He can do anything to spite people. He used to steal people’s underwear from the clothes line. What are you staring at? My father caught him red handed stealing my yellow ones.”

“You wear yellow knickers?”

“They were given to me, OK? And I was very young. My father made me wear them. And I didn’t know colours then. Now what do we do with these?”

“We can just return them to the right people and tell them where we found them.”

Sattu gave Chinki the look again. It wasn’t Chinki’s fault, he remembered. His father had told him that Chinki was born like that. Not righteous. Just slow. There were no Nepalis in their family, yet his eyes were like two slits, like Sattu’s own would be when he woke up from a long sleep. Chinki always looked like he was waking up from a long sleep. And his nose looked like it had been bashed all the way into his head with a brick. They used to say his mother ate the wrong salt when he was in her stomach. The one without iodine. That’s why he came out like this.

“No, we can’t,” Sattu sighed, regretting telling Chinki, of all the boys. But he was the first one he’d met in the morning after abandoning the game the previous night, and including anyone else in their secret now was dangerous.

“Why? Everyone knows what Pardesi’s like. They’ll believe us.”

“Because it’ll reach my father’s ears and he’ll want to know what I was doing in Pardesi’s shack, that’s why.”

“But what if there’s important news in the letters? Shouldn’t they be told?”

“What do you mean ‘what if’? Of course there’s important news. Why would people write letters and buy stamps otherwise?”

“You read the letters?!”

“I had them all night, OK? And I read some not all.”

“What do we do now?”

“That’s what I’ve been asking all this while. Go home and bring a pencil and some paper. We’ll start with a list.”

And as Chinki walked away, Sattu kicked him a dozen times in his head.

So they sat on Jaichand’s abandoned cart and started the list of six undelivered letters that Pardesi had stolen from the Letter Box and Sattu had stolen from Pardesi.

The first one was for Jaichand whose abandoned cart they’d made their headquarters.

“It’s from his village. They were performing a *janeyu* ceremony for his nephew. ‘Send money’, it says.”

“What’s a *janeyu*?”

“It’s a holy thread you wear around your body when you turn thirteen.”

“But you don’t have one.”

“I’m not thirteen.”

“But you have hair above your lip.”

“My father says I’m an early bloomer. I’ll become a man faster and help him soon.”

“So is it like what Pandit wears? The one he wraps around his ears when he squats to pee?”

“Yes.”

“So once you’re thirteen and you get your own *janeyu*, will you have to squat to pee? Shouldn’t it become easier to stand and pee as you grow taller? It becomes bigger doesn’t it?”

“Chinki, do you want to be a part of this secret operation or shall I ask Poltu instead?”

“No, no. Tell me what to do.”

“Write Jaichand’s name and put a tick mark against it. Jaichand went off to his village and never returned. In fact he even owes rent. I heard my father talking to Pandey. So if he’s gone to the village, he’d know by now. And they would’ve taken his money for the boy’s *janeyu*. That’s if he had any. So put a tick.”

“OK. Tick. But what does a tick mean?”

“It means we don’t have to do anything. Everything got taken care of on its own.”

“So what will crossing something out mean? That we have to take care of it? Shouldn’t it be the other way round?”

“We’ll see when that happens. Take the next one.”

“Suman Mausi. Here, you read it. I’ll write the name.”

“It’s an electricity bill. For three months. And it’s only hundred rupees! That stingy cow. She must be rotating her fan with that stick of hers.”

“So is it a tick or a cross?”

“Let me see now….. She definitely has electricity these days. Can’t be sure about last year. I can see her house from my window. If it was dark, I would’ve noticed. So put a tick.”

“But how did she pay her bill if she never got one?”

“There are duplicates for those things. You’ll know when you grow up.”

“So two done and four to go. So far we don’t have to take care of anything.”

The next two were for Verma, Figru’s father. They had printed glossy paper inside with pictures of machines and big boxes. With their prices written under each.

“These are called advertisements,” Sattu declared.

“But those come on TV.”

“Sometimes they send letters to people telling them to buy stuff.”

“Now? What if this was important stuff that Verma needed to buy?”

“If it was so important, he would’ve gone to the market and bought it. He wouldn’t sit at home and wait in the hope that someone would want to sell him the exact same machine he needed.”

“So tick then?”

“Ya. I don’t like him much in any case.”

“So four done and two to go. So far we don’t have to take care of anything!”

“Good. This one’s for Pandit from his village.”

“What does it say?”

“Durga getting married. Finally. The boy has one leg. But he can plough the fields. Come with family. Don’t bring Chachi.”

“Now what? What if they don’t know that Durga got married?”

“Hmmm… let me think. This was one year back. Didn’t they have some visitors some time back from the village? When Ashok didn’t come out to play for a week? It could’ve been them.”

“Why don’t you go and ask Ashok directly? He plays with you big boys.”

“And what do I ask him? If he has a one legged brother in law? What if they don’t know yet?”

“So then what?”

“We’ll have to find out.”

“So do I put a tick or a cross?”

This Chinki was getting harder to handle by the letter. Sattu would have to choose his accomplices better in the future.

“Nothing yet. We haven’t decided, have we? Just hide everything under the cart and let’s go find Ashok.”



They found Ashok hammering nails into the big Jamun tree outside the Punjabis’ house. He nearly dropped the hammer when he saw Sattu and Chinki coming but when he realized who they were, he started hammering again.

“Just pretend like nothing’ wrong. And do your own thing while I talk to him,” Sattu hissed at Chinki. So Chinki started circling the Jamun tree and when Ashok looked at him like he’d gone mad, he picked up a stone, threw it to break the monotony of circling and then, started circling again.

“What are you doing with *him*?” Ashok asked Sattu.

“He’s not with me. I just found him coming here. But what are you doing hammering nails into the Jamun tree?”

“I’m going to kill it.”

Chinki stopped circling and stared at Ashok through the slits. Ashok stared back and he started circling again.

“Kill the tree? With nails?” It was Sattu.

“Yes. Trees don’t like iron. If you hammer enough nails into them, they die. You’ll see. In seven days the jamun tree will turn dry and die.”

“But who told you this?”

“Roshan. They taught him in science class”

“Kill a small bush then. Why do you want to kill the whole jamun tree?”

Chinki was still circling, but it was becoming more frantic.

“Have you eaten a single jamun from this tree?” Ashok asked Sattu.

Chinki was coming dangerously close to colliding with one of them.

“No” Sattu responded after some thought.

“That’s because no one has. The Punjabis don’t let anyone. It’s not their tree! If we can’t have any jamuns, they won’t either. You watch how I kill it.”

“In that case we should kill the *karaunda* tree in Baba’s house too. He doesn’t even let us pick the ones fallen on the ground.”

“We should. We should kill them all. But let’s get this one done first.”

And Ashok went back to hammering nails and Chinki, who’d stopped revolving, started again with renewed zeal. Now was the time.

“Hey listen,” Sattu started, “What about your cousin Durga who used to come here every summer? Didn’t see her around this year. Didn’t she come?”

“Of course she did. She just didn’t come out to play. She’s married now.”

“Oh she is, is she?” It was Chinki, smiling from one ear to the other in that idiot face of his, and to Sattu’s horror, running around the tree now mumbling “she’s married, she’s married” to himself.

This was getting out of hand so Sattu decided to leave. “My father must be looking for me,” he said, running away.

“Take this boy with you, or I’ll hammer some nails into him too.”



They met again later at Jaichand’s cart but Sattu thought it best not to mention Chinki’s behavior in front of Ashok. It was his own fault, he thought. He should’ve known better than to take him along. And in any case, trying to explain to him would take that much longer.

“Just put a tick against Pandit’s name also,” is all he said to Chinki.

Chinki of course, knew something was up, so he did as instructed.

That was five out of six. That left just the final letter to be taken care of. Or not.

It was a post card, not a letter like the usual ones that were sealed in envelopes. And it was addressed to…….. Horror of horrors:



Gulabi.



That monster of a woman, Gulabi. She was fat and huge and uglier than Rama Bua. Her stomach was black and rounder than Pandey’s even. Anyone who had the guts to stare long enough knew that her *saree *was hitched way below her navel making her belly look even more ominous. If you saw her walking down the gully, you could only see her stomach till she waddled right up to you and then you’d see the ring on her nostril, like the ones they fixed on bulls.

If the sight of her was scary, her voice was scarier still. It boomed like the speakers at the Ganesh Puja *pandal*. Except that Ganesh Puja happened once a year but Gulabi boomed every day. At anyone who crossed her path. And you’d never know which way she was looking through those thick glasses of hers. So you just kept out of her way all the time.

No one knew how old she was. She had grandkids their age, but she looked like she could be their father. No one knew what she did either. A lot of men came to her house and they ate pan and had loud arguments on the* chabootra*.

But that’s all they knew.

She didn’t like animals and children. They’d seen her kicking her grandchildren more than once. And it was rumored that when Rani the bitch had her last litter, she’d got Rajan to pack all eight pups into a bag and drown them in the lake. Apparently, she couldn’t sleep all night because the pups kept yelping in the cold.

They all knew she was a woman to avoid and if they saw her coming, they ran.

And here was a post card addressed to her.

“What does it say?” Chinki asked worriedly.

“Maggu is dead.”

There was silence for a little while. Neither was sure what to say or do. They hadn’t expected Gulabi’s letter to be in the bundle. Leave alone bring the news of someone’s death. Finally Chinki spoke.

“That’s it? There must be more.”

“Here, read it yourself” Sattu handed over the postcard to him.

Sure enough, in the entire postcard space, there were three words scrawled painstakingly and with obvious effort because the letters were disjointed.

Maggu is dead.

M a g g u m a r g a y i.

It must’ve been so painful for the writer to just put down these words that he refused to write further. He had obviously not anticipated two do-gooders getting the letter and being foxed with questions about the deceased.

Who was Maggu? How did she die? How old was she when she died? Did she have children? Or was she a child herself, like them? And most important, who was she to Gulabi?

What if she’d already heard about Maggu’s death?

But they both knew that was impossible. In a locality as small as theirs, births and deaths couldn’t be hidden. Everyone knew of everyone being born and everyone dying. And Deaths, especially, were not quiet. They came with a lot of wailing and chest beating and bringing several houses down. And no such event had happened in Gulabi’s house. She didn’t even let people in her house die at will, the tyrant.

“Can’t we just ask her kids like we asked Ashok?” Chinki tried.

“Krishna and Bobby? When was the last time they spoke to anyone other than with each other? And the first time they talk to strangers, we ask them if they know that Maggu is dead?”

“Can’t we just forget about this letter? We’ll think we found only five.”

“And where is the honour in that? Imagine poor Maggu’s soul. She must know we have this post card.” This was a scary thought and the boys looked around, just to be sure.

“So we just walk in and tell Gulabi that Maggu is dead?”

“Let’s think it over today. We’ll meet again tomorrow and decide what to do. I’ll think about it in the meantime.”



And think about it they did. Except that Chinki thought about it much more than Sattu did. He thought about it so hard that he dreamed they were in Gulabi’s house and telling her that Maggu had died. And Gulabi, who was chewing her morning *gudakhu*, spat it out on them and bellowed “You killed her” and lunged at them. At this point Chinki woke up and decided that whatever happened the next morning, he would not be the one going to Gulabi’s house.

So when the boys met the next morning, Chinki said “I’m not going to her house. She thinks we killed her.”

“What?”

“I mean she will think we killed Maggu.”

“But we have the letter as proof. And she knows we live here and Maggu lives in the village. Lived.”

“But what if she finds out the letter is old. She’ll blame us for not telling her earlier.”

“She’s illiterate. She’ll never know. She’ll have to get it read by someone. And we can just give it and come back. And if they ask, we can say the postman gave it to us because he couldn’t find her house. And if they do find out that the letter’s old, they’ll blame it on the postal department, not on us. We’re safe.”

“So you’re sure we’ll just leave the letter and come back?”

“Yes.”

“To whomever we meet right? We may not even have to meet Gulabi, no?”

“Yes.”

“Will you hold my hand if she opens the door?”

“No. You’re not my little sister. In any case I will have the letter in one hand and with the other I will be knocking.”

So the two of them walked tentatively. Chinki praying and Sattu hoping that someone, anyone other than Gulabi, should open the door for them.

When they reached, the main door to the compound was open. They walked in. On one side was the tap. Empty. Of all days, Bobby had chosen not to do the dishes today. On the other side was the tyre that Krishna used to pedal with a stick. Even Krishna was nowhere to be seen.

So they stepped a little closer to the door of the house that was wide open. But it was so dark inside, they couldn’t see a thing. Both the boys were frantically peeping inside, hoping that either Krishna or Bobby would be sitting in the dark when they heard the bellow.

“Aye”

And in a flash Gulabi was out of the door and glaring down at them hands on waist.

Chinki was shaking and Sattu was trying to hold him still.

“What is it?” she bellowed again.

Pause.

“*Arre* is there something or have you come for morning *Darshan*?” she hollered at them.

“Letter” Sattu managed to sputter out. “Postman gave us.”

At this, Gulabi pushed a *mooda* to her front using her feet and squatted down, heaving like a giant storm, and came face to face with the boys, breathing huge gushes of stale breath right onto their face.

“Hmmmm…” she said taking it and flipping it over.

“Where is it from?” Her morning gudakhu was all over her mouth, just like in Chinki’s dream and he was trying to hide his face behind Sattu in case she spat it out on them before proclaiming them murderers.

Sattu of course, had other worries. He had not anticipated meeting Gulabi. What if she asked him to read the letter? What if it turned out after all that HE would be the one telling her that Maggu had died? What would she do to the two of them in this empty house? If they screamed, would his father hear him? Chinki’s mother? He would have to scream really loud, he thought and started slowly collecting his breath in his stomach in preparation.

Sure enough she started searching the expanse of her massive body, looking for something. And she kept muttering through it. Loud booms of mutterings. Till finally, she thrust the postcard back at Sattu pretending to be literate after all.

“Can’t find my glasses”, she said and started to roll the ball of gudakhu in her mouth.

Just what he’d feared. Should he just blurt it out? That Ms. Maggu was no more? Or pretend to read it first as if he’d only just seen the postcard for the first time. Or should he just say something entirely different, like ‘You’re darling Mrs. Maggu has delivered a bonny baby boy’? But she could get the letter read again.

“Read it boy” She was much louder this time.

So Sattu turned the postcard over and pretended to read the three words that had tormented him all night, all the time twitching his face as if he was reading something terribly illegible. And slowly he heard his voice saying the three words that could land him and Chinki the same fate as Maggu.

Maggu is dead.

Silence.

And then Gulabi rose like a massive wave from the *mooda* and said “About time she died too. Not a calf in five years and no milk to boot.”

And she disappeared into the black hole from where she’d come. 

