From: Pervin Saket<pervin0607@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: The More Things Change
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Arun Kishore Upadhyay counted twenty-two steps, took a sharp U-turn and retraced twenty-two steps. Sona’s muffled cries were getting louder but instinctively he knew that the crescendo was still a little while away. Disinfectant rose into his nostrils and he tried to distract himself by cracking his knuckles. He mimed a prayer, bargaining, just this once for the Goddess to smile upon him, in exchange for never demanding anything else again. He’d disappear completely from the radar of wishes, he promised.

This would be a tricky one, Arun knew, and he had a stack of medical reports to prove it. If they had been childless so far, it wasn’t for lack of trying. An accident. A stillborn girl. A miscarriage. 2002. 2004. 2006. And yet, the doctors found no reason why she shouldn’t have a successful delivery the next time. And the Cama and Albless Hospital, a grand, old stone building with these corridors he knew too well, was witness to their struggle.

“Give the mother enough time to rest so that she and the baby are both strong.”

They had stuck to that suggestion. Plus other recommendations of pills, powders and patience. And now, in November 2008, as advised by professionals and family alike, Sona was in labour. However, the pattern didn’t look promising, and Arun’s mother had wordlessly ensured that all celebrations of the this pregnancy were subdued. The greater the joy, the harder the fall. As high as low. Equal and opposite. Not too different from a see-saw. No, he wouldn’t think of that now. This was a day of birth, not death, Arun pleaded with his head. And that had been a long time ago.

Actually it was exactly nine years, eight months and eleven days ago – he knew because he never forgot. Just a little less than a decade, just a little more than a moment. The last time he had seen Manu alive, the last time he had been a father. Is one still a father when an only child dies? Why doesn’t the cloak ever slip away from the shoulders, why won’t the memory soften?

Manu, a plump 2-year-old (who, the family worried, hadn’t still started talking) had been clapping and gurgling watching the neighbour’s twins alternate up and down. The see-saw was actually just an abandoned piece of sleeper wood placed strategically on a smooth rock in the courtyard. The Sharma twins, then six-years-old, clutched the chipped wood on either side, leaping into the air, hearts pounding, awfully aware of the inch-high gap between the wood and their buttocks. Hold for a second. Intake of breath. Thump! Their soles hitting the rough dry earth, each boy’s toes clutching the ground for a futile second before he was thrown into the air again. As thrilling as the game was for them, Manu was even more enchanted, and watched them soar up and dive down with open-mouthed wonder.

That’s it, that was the last expression Arun had seen. He’d walked away from that beautifully amazed face and returned that evening to stillness. He gathered amidst sobs and accusations that at some point the boys had gone in the Sharma’s storeroom, to the very room forbidden to them, and found one of their father’s kattas. Some insisted that they believed it to be a toy, others claimed that all the locks and warnings that surrounded the weapon couldn't have presented it as a toy, and some held that while one boy was keen to fire a shot, the other tried to pry the gun away from him. The only certainty that lay before Arun was the inert face of his son wrapped in a shroud. And Sona. She hadn’t shed a tear.

“Slap her,” an aunt said, sobbing. “Make her cry!”

“She’ll damage her brain if she holds it in!”

Arun walked towards her and reached for a shoulder. She took a step back. She stated, her voice clear and flat, staring straight ahead, “I can’t stay here. We’re leaving.”

Of course, his parents wouldn’t hear of it, Arun knew even in that moment of heartbreak.

Instead, while Sona’s limp body half-fell against the wall, Arun found that he could talk calmly to the priest and arrange the last rites. He clarified that no, Manu had not been older than 28 months (or he would have had to be cremated), that his milk teeth had not fallen (and the family wouldn’t need to follow the processes of sutak or cleansing of impurities), that there was no need to keep the body on ice while relatives from Delhi arrived. However, when Sona found voice and demanded a police complaint be filed, Arun collapsed into the emptiness he had been waiting for. He watched her soft, shattered form move with heartbreaking randomness and allowed the hollow cave to engulf him completely.

Perhaps in some ways he wasn’t surprised. Growing up in Teragarh, he’d known the danger, lying dormant and deceptive, despite the garbs of change. He was foolish and arrogant to think he’d remain untouched. Teragarh was not large enough to accommodate multiple realities.

He’d heard stories of sons inheriting gangs and daughters receiving an elaborate education in shrewd cunning. “In our time,” his father had once said with a shudder, “crops were razed more often than they were harvested. At least you children are growing up in peace.”

The makeshift see-saw was probably one of the few innocent games childhood in Teragarh had known. A village where just a generation ago, gunpowder and sand had laced the courtyards, where women once climbed boxes marked with the danger skull symbol to reach the higher shelves of their almirahs, where boys played antakshari with cuss words.

Now each morning he heard the boys in school sing-song the national pledge. The separate girls school probably had their own tune too, but at a more lady-like volume which didn't reach his ears. He passed fields swaying with wheat and remembered an aunt’s description of dry wells piled with full gas cylinders. “Our wheat and sugar sacks were half-empty but the aluminum jars were well-stocked with bullets,” she’d commented, her jaw raised, trying to hold the juices of her pan. She had a tendency to generate strange comparisons though; she’d once insisted that Arun had the wrists of a girl who danced.

To be fair, several families only bought kattas or country-made pistols as status symbols, firing them off during weddings and festivals. A burst of light. A blast of sound. A celebration. A warning. We don’t but we can. A power so heady, it took the powerless to escape it.

The kattas, often available for as little as 600 rupees were crudely assembled by adolescent hands, from strips of ordinary iron pipes and abandoned machinery. True, the guns wounded more often than they killed, but when they were fatal, they could stretch death by several hours. Manu, little Manu, died instantly, Arun thought, relieved and wretched.

The police, the panchayat, the twins, the neighbour’s male relatives, even the headmaster all made regular appearances, bringing with them advice, regret, blame, denial, speeches, empathy, morals – and twice, money. The last time he saw them, Arun simply asked his neighbor, “Have you thrown away the katta?”

The man didn't even look away.

Sona initiated the cooped up comparisons between Delhi and Mumbai. Their whispers were frantic, sometimes assured, often tangled, always in the dead of night. She wanted to leave without a trace. They yo-yoed. They see-sawed.

Then, one regular morning, the couple woke up at the normal time and seemingly went about routine tasks in their methodical manner, steady in the unvarying sameness. But when nightfall came, their room was discovered to be abandoned. Sona and Arun were already three hundred kilometers away, the rattling of the train drumming out a song of celebration.

Two trains and three days later, they had found themselves at what was then the historic Victoria Terminus, now rechristened and unhistoried.

 ***



The corridors of the Cama and Albless hospital were too short and wide for an expectant father. Maternity wards should be long and narrow, Arun thought, like in the movies. Sometimes he thought the walls mocked him, that it was time to give up. That he could escape neither his fate nor the history of his soil. That the running and planning and hoping was futile. The more things changed the more they remained the same.

But Sona wouldn’t listen. She had taken up a job at at a primary school but only spoke of the emptiness that rang in her ears when children shrieked around her. He couldn’t bear to look at her when a Johnsons powder advertisement lit up their television screen. Her plump frame, inflated up by hormone injections, was hollow within. This would be their last attempt he knew, and suddenly, again, he was afraid. He wished old Mrs Mehta who lived next door would come and cast off the evil eye with a wave of lemon over his head. But she had stayed put, held back by rumours and cautious friends.

Gang wars, someone said. Don’t venture out tonight.

Just a film shooting, someone else squealed. The guns aren’t real.

No, it’s an escaped prisoner, another predicted.

Arun couldn’t be bothered with unnecessary speculation. This was Mumbai, teaming with police officers and military cantonments. This was not Teragarh. This was not then. He walked up to the window and stared at Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus towering just a few hundred meters away. It’s strange, he thought, how this train station has been a part of his heaviest moments. Whether it was his escape from Teragarh or his first job as a clerk in one of the private banks lining Phirozeshah Mehta road, the station was never further than a bend. Like hens in that abandoned courtyard, clucking their chicks under their wings, it seemed to ensure that Arun didn’t stray far enough to go unseen by the tip of the tallest steeple.

Now, at night, the monument’s façade was lit in a soft golden yellow. Its turrets pointed to the clouds of what was supposed to be a winter sky. But the concept of winters in Mumbai was misleading. It was already the 26th of November but only the hint of a chill lurked in the air.

Suddenly, on the main road facing the hospital, Arun sensed a flurry of activity. A burst of stillness. Another scramble.

A shrill cry pierced the still air.

Arun stared at the door of Sona’s room. But it hadn’t come from there. It came from outside. Arun leaned out of the window. A watchman fell on the steps. He didn’t get up. As if on cue, the lights went out. Outside, the streets looked different and it struck Arun that they were deserted. A siren sounded, whether of a police van or an ambulance, Arun wouldn’t know.

He felt a tug and turned around. A man whispered something incoherent. White nurses emerged from the end of the corridor. With fingers on their lips. Shh! Shh! They hustled relatives behind doors of wards, offices and bathrooms.

Arun was rushed into Sona’s room. When he entered, they looked up but immediately resumed their strange work. They were lifting Sona and her mattress and placing her on the floor. Unprompted, he began to help. Within a few seconds, all the equipment and people were crouched on the cold tiles. Only a torch illuminated the room. Three nurses and two doctors squatted all around Sona. A cloth had been stuffed into her mouth so that she swallowed her screams. She lay in a pool of blood which increasingly inched out. Again, a prayer escaped his lips, this time for her. A woman gave Arun a wet cloth and indicated that he may wipe Sona’s forehead.

Her fingernails dug deep in his palms and he focused on looking only at her face. He tried to say something reassuring but found that his whispers unsettled him too much. They reminded him of mutterings and urgent undertones of a time and place gone behind.

After several deep breaths, there was a final push. For a second everything stood in limbo.

Then Sona opened her eyes. He patted her face and removed the cloth from her mouth. She blinked in relief.

The hushed frenzy began again. In torchlight, a cord was cut. Wet towels and cotton were produced.

“You have a son,” a nurse whispered. Someone shuffled away so he could shift closer. He saw only blood, outlining a strange and shriveled form.

“Baby will cry now!” a frantic hiss sounded.

A nurse placed a gentle, urgent hand on the child’s mouth. It closed its eyes in preparation of a scream and Arun did the same. A feeble wail erupted from the child. Simultaneously, a shot sounded. The room suppressed a gasp. The nurse placed the child at Sona’s breast to restrain its cry.

The torch flickered. Someone banged on their door. They crouched closer together, curling up. Arun put an arm around Sona. He looked at the boy’s mouth. The child was sucking awkwardly, taking in tiny bursts of air and milk. And blood.

The torch died out. The vision disappeared.

Defeated by the incessant bursts of guns, a tear rolled down Arun’s cheek. His other hand reached for his son and in the darkness, across a bloodstained bedsheet, the boy clutched his finger. 

