From: Poornima Laxmeshwar<poorni.mathad@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: What I Seek Is Who I Am
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

I am a man. A 45-year-old man who has seen life like the way it was portrayed and mostly believed that what I saw was the truth because I neither had the will to fight nor had the courage to go beyond the conventional. When I was asked to genuflect and pray, I obeyed. Likewise, when I was told to love the woman I was married to, I obeyed again (though I miserably failed at it). Then I was told that I wasn’t man enough. I was a weakling because I never dominated, never imposed, never screamed to be heard. I always chose silence instead. I could never be the rebel Appa wanted me to become, could not be the genius Amma worshiped for; I just ended up being silent, being me.

The world is an act of monomania. We are drawn towards definitions, standard synonyms like without them the whole entirety of a thing will be plainly lost and never found. In this act we forget that we discover the best when we don’t bind, don’t compel, when we just refuse to label. I was unconventional and how did this world term me to be so? Because I was a man and I let everyone around me dictate my life on their terms. Because I was a man and I shed tears to unburden a feeling of loss, cried to pack the baggage of other’s expectations that weighed so much on my heart, and flushed it down the abyss.

That night when the kids and S were asleep, I was busy reading “I am that” by Nisargadatta Maharaj. The silence of the night and the internal chatter in my head always collided in those moments of solace. Philosophy was my true home and I felt that I belonged there. That sense of belonging which I craved within the four walls we built and who’s EMIs I paid unfailingly. What was the freaking purpose of my life? The question ate me like my dog finished the cookie even before it reached its mouth. My entirety constantly haunted me and with everyone taunting me for being egoless, these questions only made me more restless. While I was reading, Sumona walked in randomly and the first thing she did, like she always did, was checked my phone. No messages, no calls, nothing suspicious. My heart was racing and the fact that she scared me, made me feel miserable, momentarily. She was capable of killing me. In her fit of rage, she would throw things at me and the root of my fear only grew stronger with every throw she maliciously practiced.

But having stated all these negative statements, let me admit frankly that I am no saint either. What kept me going forward was love, my love for Viha and the quest to entangle the reason of life. Viha and I met at a poetry reading where she read her poems and I read her. Throughout the sessions, she unknowingly spoke about non-duality. Non-duality as a concept interested her and for me, it was an excuse to get closer to her thoughts. Each day we spoke for hours, and when I say we spoke, I mean we had conversations even more than we had sex. I spoke continuously and she listened, without complaining. I realized that maybe all that I lacked in my life was a pair of ‘ears’ that could listen and not send the information to the brain for further judgment. Not judging me for being unmanly was the best thing that happened to me. Maybe I was more of a woman and less of a man, or maybe I was built in reverse proportion, but after all, I was someone who needed love, just like any other man or woman. Love grows beyond the genders, exactly like philosophy and poetry. We, in our private moments of love, found them bundled together, waiting to be embraced.

“I want to meditate on you”, she said with a smile that painted stars in broad daylight.

“Meditation is nothing but a state of being constantly aware. It isn’t as complicated as it is made to believe. And I guess, you are already thinking of me enough. You have to focus on your job. I don’t want you to land up in trouble for taking too many offs.”

“I will deal with the job. Don’t worry about it. They know how efficient I have been and I still can do wonders there.”

For several minutes I went silent. I had to communicate this and now was the time. Through the years I always felt that it was important for me to matter to someone. To be that special somebody to someone who would fight the world and cross the seven seas if needed. But with every failed relationship I learned that no one can love me more than myself. So I distributed myself partially each time I fell in love without giving away myself. With this, each relationship became the same. I loved and I loved more, leaving behind a trail that I explored but that never took me home. This time, with Viha it was no different.

“I have decided something. Might come as a bit of a shock. But I have made my own first decision in all these years, without looking for consent.”

“Whoa! You look damn serious right now. What the hell have you decided and about what?”

“I am getting a divorce.”

“What? Are you serious? You have a wife you are scared of and you have preteens to be bothered about. Plus, you have a respectable job and at this age? Seriously. I will be married in a couple of months and will fly soon. I am only 28. You know that. I won’t be around. I hope am clear.”

I hugged her, kissed her, one last time and said, “You will never see me anymore. I wish you luck. Treat me like dust that brushed your Jimmy Choo shoes that you later wiped clean and made it sparkle, again. Bye.”

I had nothing much to gather from there. Memories, moments, laughs, tears, arguments — none of them. I master the art of letting be and letting go. So I picked myself and went home to the same four walls, this time with a difference.

When I announced the fact that I wanted to go separate, Smriti laughed at me hysterically. She thought I had lost my mind or maybe the weed was becoming too much for me handle. She rambled things I didn’t bother wasting my ears on, threw things, created a ruckus and I in response offered my silence. When she realized that her tantrums were futile she just walked off. The kids would eventually understand.

I packed my books, left back the four walls waiting that stood like empty rhetoric and walked my first step towards freedom, towards myself.

You ask me what took me so long to decide. I don’t have an answer to that. Obligations ensure that sleeping peacefully is a disagreement. They need a body to enter, nerves to hold on, thoughts to decay, ferment and the darkness — whispers, whispers. I gave up division. Division of my role, division of gender, division of thought processes and everything that divided me, that defined me. With every line that was drawn, I was divided into twos, fours, eights — bits, shards, pieces and more pieces.

I walked away from the convention, tired of swaying like a pendulum between the printed paradoxes of the society. As a man, I have enough philosophy to last this lifetime. As a soul, I have enough silence to live with. That is what I seek. As for poetry, it will find its way to me. 

