From: Vartika Sharma Lekhak<neovartikalekhak@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: The Girl with Sealed Vagina
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

In Laajpur, a notorious town on the outskirts of Delhi, strange things had
begun to happen. The events had baffled everyone. Initially some had
dismissed it as sheer foolhardiness and some as an act of sorcery. But now
people were beginning to panic.

It all happened after the arrival of *that *girl. From where she came, why
she was there and to whom she belonged, no one had any idea.

It was the chai wala at the railway station who had spotted her first.
Under a peepal tree the girl was sitting cross-legged and devouring pakoras
in a paper plate. She was all alone. No male relative or friend to escort
her at this time of the night. It had never happened before in the town.
Everyone knew how dangerous it was. Even an eighty-year-old dreaded
venturing out alone after sundown. Families lived in a permanent state of
paranoia to protect their daughters.


It was this lawlessness which had earned Laajpur the epithet of rape
capital of India. An NGO had reported last year that this was one of the
prime reasons behind the high rate of female foeticide and low female
literacy rate in the region.  It was a rogue town within the heart of this
democratic country and the brunt of this anarchy was borne by females.


The girl would arrive at the tea stall every night and sit there for hours.
Her presence had started to make the men uneasy. The swearing, loud
crackles, impromptu jokes had a nervous edge, not that they were scared of
her, but because the sight of a female in a male territory was frustrating,
a challenge to their supremacy. They even hurled abuses at her, poked her
with their mean eyes but the girl would keep sitting there, eating pakoras
at an unhurried pace. Some tried to chastise her, had she run away from
home? Was she lost? But she would not even bat her eyes to acknowledge
them, as if they were like a transparent sheet of glass. May be she is deaf
and mute, they concluded. But then she thanked the chai wala sweetly when
he brought a cut of tea for her. Later he told others that her name is Rmaa.


‘But how do you know, did she tell you’, a customer asked.


‘It is tattooed on her arm. I saw it when she stretched her hand to take
the cup.’


‘What more is tattooed? Did you peek anything else’, the men winked at each
other and broke into loud cheering, eyeing the girl like a piece of meat.


Even in her loosely fitted orange blouse and long green skirt, which she
wore every day, they could figure that she must not be more than fourteen
or fifteen. There was just a hint of curves in her dress, which the men
fantasized with an open lust while sipping tea one after another. In a way
the chai wala was glad of her presence because it had made his shop earn
profit like never before. And thus he didn’t mind offering the
complimentary tea and snacks to the girl.


This had almost become a ritual, but one night, true to everyone’s
premonition, the girl was pulled into a van by a group of boys looking for
an adventure. This all happened right in front of everyone, at least fifty
people in their full senses. But not one uttered a word of protest. It was
a normal affair for them and in fact the girl had asked for that. Haven’t
they warned her so many times? And besides one of the boys was the son of
the Police Chief.


Next day the girl was sitting at her usual spot with the same aloofness as
if nothing had happened. Everyone was astonished. In such small towns this
kind of news travels faster than its digital versions.


‘There is no vagina!!!’ The group exclaimed in unison.


The grapevine was brought by the school peon where the four boys, who had
abducted the girl, studied.

‘Yes, that much his mother could gather out of him when she found him
hiding in a cupboard. Other three are also equally sacred.’

The story that finally emerged after the gossips and facts were pieced
together was beyond anybody’s comprehension. Almost everyone refused to
believe it.


She was taken to the fields next to the canal where the boys had planned to
rape her and then dump her in the canal if she resisted much. But no need
arose of that because she, almost obligingly, followed them. Also there was
no need of bruising her body or tearing her clothes as she herself lifted
the skirt when they pushed her on the ground. At first Mahesh, it was his
turn this time to *hit the jackpot* first, thought that he was
hallucinating because of ganja. But then others also recoiled in disgust
(and horror). There was nothing, no hole between her legs. It was all
sealed, like a dead-end. How was that even possible, they wondered aloud
while the girl kept lying on the ground with some mock satisfaction on her
face.  This increased their frustration further and then in a fit of
renewed rage Mahesh pressed onto her. But in the very next instant he was
yelping in pain. His *thing *was scalded like it had touched hot iron. The
laughter of the girl was still reverberating in the night sky when the boys
started the van in hurry and ran away.

The news of the sealed vagina was spreading like wildfire. The tea shop was
minting money as more and more customers, even from far flung areas, were
thronging the place to catch a glimpse of the girl.
But the actual chaos began when women started arriving one by one,
unescorted. The peepal tree had transformed into a sort of shrine. Somebody
brought a worn carpet and spread it near the seat of the girl. A makeshift
screen from an old saree was pitched to give them some privacy.


 ‘Rmaa help us,’ the chai wala strained his ear to catch the conversation.
Or did they say Maa?


In a small town like this, it is not difficult to recognize people even if
they are covered from head to toe. From the manner they walk, dress up,
smell or whisper, there is always something to give them away. And thus the
tea vendor was astonished to recognize a woman who was presumed to be dead
for more than a year after on the behest of Panchayat, the village council,
she was brutally raped by almost everyone in the village when her brother
eloped with a girl from higher caste. The woman had disappeared soon after
the ordeal. And then there was another one, who bore a striking resemblance
to a teenage girl who had disappeared some ten years back after she had
stormed media with the allegations against her politician father about
incest. There were many more, a mason’s wife, a school teacher, a farmer’s
mother, the women who were raped and forced to live with it.


‘We knew that Devi will liberate us from this misery,’ the mason’s wife was
weeping at the feet of Rmaa.

‘Seal this vagina like you have sealed yours’

‘Help us Maa, salvage us,’ the women were chanting.


The tears of anguish were floating in her eyes as the girl embraced the
women one by one.

With their wishes granted the women returned to their abode, leaving behind
the veils which were now fluttering on the lower branches of the peepal
tree.


 Next day the town witnessed another bizarre episode. The women, who had a
phantom existence in this town till now, were now swarming it. There was no
fear on the gentle faces rather it was the men who were clouded in panic
and frustration as they dared not touch the women however they were
tempted, not even in a dark alley, not even if the hussies invitingly
exhibited their smooth legs or displayed a carefree smile because they knew
the this was the cult of sealed vagina whose curse had already cost the
chief’s son his manhood.


Seeing the power that the sealed vagina wielded, the women brought their
daughters as well who they had left behind earlier fearing that who will
marry them if they lose the basic essence of womanhood. But now they knew
that the gains were higher than the loss. They were tired of carrying the
burden of fertility which had started to consume them only. The gift that
the nature had bestowed upon them to flourish the mankind had now become
their very weakness and thus it was now time to surrender it.


 ‘Rmaa Rmaa Rmaa,’ the chants grew louder and louder as the girl salvaged
them one by one.

The cult was swelling day by day as females from even across the
international border were now visiting the peepal shrine.  And the
aftershock of this tremor was reaching far and wide.  Schools were the
first to feel it when the girls walked in fearlessly.


Women no longer fought for ‘ladies’ seat in local transport. More than half
of the work load of the police was cut down as the crime rate had
drastically dropped.  Almost all professions were now dominated by women
because they were naturally flexible and hardworking and now they didn’t
need to make excuses to escape long night shifts, field trips or any
vulnerable situation. From military to a cab driver’s profession, they were
everywhere.

Though the flourishing workforce had made the country one of the top
economies of the world, it was giving nightmares to many people.


The myth of superior sex was broken.


So frustrating it was to watch those skirts which fluttered with the wind
or the sensual body under a six meter drape.  They could not dare to touch
even their own wives, daughters, sisters. Their exclusive jobs were gone;
next the Parliament will be taken over and so on. The international
pressure was also mounting to solve this *disruption. *


Even the religion was at the brink of extinction. The priests at the Shakti
Peeth temple were vexed to see that the Brahamaputra water was no longer
turning red, the goddess had stopped menstruating. The vagina of the deity
was sealed and so did of other female deities worldwide.

A high level meeting, comprising of important religious heads, scientists,
economists and representatives from international community was called to
discuss this *disruption*.


‘Open the Hole’


With this objective, an expert team of doctors and military landed in
Laajpur. The girl was secretly brought to a high-security cell and laid
down on a makeshift operating table for the procedure.  The hand of the
surgeon shook with nervousness as he held the scalpel between her legs. He
had never seen such thing. There was no mark of stitches, no cosmetic
trick. The girl had simply no vagina. He lowered the scalpel to open the
hole, but the moment it touched her there, the steel melted in his hand and
evaporated. And one by the tools, weapons, flesh, everything began to melt.
The earth began to shake. The men were unsure whether their dying brain was
playing trick on them or they actually witnessed a mythical legend when two
giant hands emerged from the fissure that had formed in the earth and
carried the girl back.

Laajpur with its over one million inhabitants was wiped out from the face
of the earth.

It was a sinkhole, the investigators concluded. Not even a single grass of
blade ever cropped on that soil. It had turned barren.

That was just the beginning.


 Soon after that the rains changed its pattern, crops failed, land turned
infertile. Sink holes were reported all over the globe, swallowing cities
without any trace. Delhi, Lahore, Mosul, Gaza, New Orleans, Washington,
Istanbul disappeared one by one.


‘The Earth is sealing its vagina’, scientists concluded.


The apocalypse has begun.

