From: Hisham Nazer <xyrosafta07@gmail.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: In Supplication
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

He rose from the rubble, wearing a white robe that had maps on it painted in red; maps of dead cities, of roads that led to the town of tears. He walked through the valley of broken walls, feet bleeding, with flickers of fire moving around like fireflies. But there was a kind of darkness in that place that even the darkest night cannot contain! It was the sheer absence of light, of all the lights that may light the hope for tomorrow. The heat didn't disturb him, as he was troubled by something greater than any mere misery. The smoke shrouded him in its almost impenetrable cloud, and with his firm steps, through this incense of destruction, he walked upon the slowly cascading bricks and stones, upon the road made of corpses and tarred with blood. He walked trampling the little ones as well, those who still had their dolls held tightly, and those who still couldn’t quite leave the age of innocence and had braided locks of hair now decorated only with red ribbons. In the place of dreams, in their open eyes, there was only a silence that surpasses sadness. And in their open eyes that silence had a single question that no one can ever answer, and the question was- “Why?” For the blinding smoke no one could see his tears that fell on the figures that would never dance again in innocent joy. On his way he saw faces, blank and blanketed by the colour of death; faces painted with blood and dust, faces without all those impatience to live one more night. And in the meaningless postures of the corpses he saw the meaning of life, that it ends, always unplanned, without a fashion that might bear any meaning. He walked past a few holy places as well, all leveled to the ground, becoming the sanctuary for the dusts, for the echoes of the wind and the bomb blasts. In the lips of the dead men who lied around those places, he didn't find prayers, he didn't find words that may move a heart or destroy it. In their lips there wasn't any lie, but only a silence of truth that defines death. In death they became worthy of the touch of his feet.

The war raged on, and everywhere there was a ceremony of sadness. It was a rain of fire and the earth shook in horror! Death was hiding behind every moment and snatched whoever it could, at its own whim! The few that survived had already forgotten the peace of a moment and were ready for death like the living are ready for life. With the robe now completely red, he walked past the men and women, the aged and the younger ones, looked at them with tearful eyes and plodded through the burning fire towards a circle drawn by an explosion. In the center he stopped, removed his robe and came out in his true form. All the men and women around him cried out loud, for there stood God, naked, with human blood all over his body! Everything stopped! Everyone forgot to breathe and looked at the spectacle in inexplicable awe! Looking at the glory of God transfigured into a human body, everyone forgot everything! But that was not why he was there that day. He didn’t come to be worshiped or to pronounce his glory in his absolute words! After looking around him with a sorrow that no human can ever experience, leaving reality in an irrecoverable shock, he fell down upon his knees, bowed down before humanity with tears and uttered these words:

“Man! Man! Why have you forsaken me! Do not pray, for in your prayers today I hear the story of my end. Do not fight in my name, because when you do, you destroy me.... I can bear no pain of being God anymore. Here I bow down before you! Kill me too! Kill me!”  

