From: Kruti Brahmbhatt<krutibrahmbhatt@gmail.com>
Date: 09 December 2016 19:00
Subject: Outside the City of Death
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

This was the second time Shamaldas Patel had come to die at Moksha Bhavan. The rays of the dawn shimmered across the Ganges bathing the high-banks, temples, shrines, Ashrams and domes along the banks in the golden hue and hymns. Enshrouded by the fragrance of incense, ash smeared monks meditated on the banks and priests and tourists dip in the holy waters. Everyone in Varanasi seemed to know where Moksha Bhavan was located, though there were no signs leading to it from the busiest intersection of the city, bustling with cycle rickshaws, Bajaj chetaks, bicycles and few black and white ambassadors.

“Remember, we had come in 1984, two days before Indira Gandhi was assassinated,” Rajni said signaling Lachho to bring her father inside. She ironed her wrinkled bottle green bandhani sari with her palm.

“Yes, yes, I remember it well. It was a bad time. It was a bad time.” Vishnu said shaking his head and fumbling to find a guest register from a set of dusty tomes on a book rack behind the registration counter. The table fan on the counter made screeching noise and spit dust from the thick register in the space around it, mostly on Vishnu, a sole target of its wrath.

Vishnu told Rajni that he had seen over 18,000 people die at this place and he could predict if a person was going to die. He didn’t think Shamaldas would die this time either. He added that he had non-resident Indians coming from as far as Mauritius, Japan, America and Tanzania. He said that his predictions remained accurate in those cases too. Rajni told him that her father was insistent and kept murmuring even in his sleep that he wanted to go to Varanasi and die there.

Lachho helped Shamaldas walk up to the allocated room. Rajni waited to ask a few questions to Vishnu.

“Is there any discount for the returning guest?”

“No discount,” Vishnu said showing his two bare hands and shaking his head. “We are giving rooms at subsidized cost anyway. This is not business for us, you see. We let poor people stay here for free. The money has to come from somewhere to run this place.”

Vishnu said that people come here to die, want Nirvana but don’t want to pay the price. He lived with his family in the same building, and he had helped families to cremate their relatives and when a person didn’t have anyone to look after, Vishnu took special care of the guest. He even sat with them at times and asked if the person had any final wish which he could help bring to fruition. Sometimes a person wanted to talk to an estranged brother or sister and apologized over a fight that took place over decades back and ruined their relationship. Sometimes, they asked Vishnu to play sitar music more frequently. On a parting note, he said that people carry so much weight all through their lives and think of shedding it only when they come closer to death when they know they cannot carry it any longer.

In the room, Shamaldas rested on a bed with his gaze fixated on the Ganges. “I just want to go to the abode of God,” he muttered and continued chanting some Mantras and rotating the prayer beads in his hands. In past few years, Lachho had heard this sentence from his master many times but he nodded obsequiously pretending to believe in those words.

  Rajni kept her handbag on the study table and observed a room for a while - opened the wardrobe cabinets, had Lachho cleaned them with a piece of cloth and asked him to help her rearrange the room. They moved aside mini dining table and chairs and wood-carved magazine stand in the corner so that their father wouldn’t trip on any of it.

“My feet are burning. Someone massage my feet.” Shamaldas said directing attention to himself. Lachho came to his bedside and started massaging his feet.

Rajni decided to take a stroll in the corridor. She called Navin and paused a question if he thought Aditya would come this time. Navin told her not to have any hope and that if he wanted to come, he would have by now. She asked him if the kids were studying well for exam and if the maids were cooking as per the weekly menu she had put up on top of their fridge door. He assured her that he could come any time she wanted him there.

Rajni wished her father would have chosen a different time to come to Varanasi. All his life, he had thought about only his own needs. The last time when he had an epiphany that he was going to die, Rajni’s younger son was barely two. She had to leave him in the care of her mother-in-law. This time too he wasn’t frail. He could walk with support and clutched to life as tenaciously as before. He berated Lachho when he didn’t get his tea or meals on time or forgot to place his shoes under his bed. She knew that her father nagged her because she listened to him. Aditya hadn’t even spoken to him in last four years. In spite of the cold treatment from him, Shamaldas craved to hear from Aditya, to see him again. All her life, Rajni wanted her parents to have this yearning for her and did everything she could do to spin their love towards her but rarely succeeded. Rajni saw Vishnu in the corridor.

“Vishnuji, don’t you get dejected seeing people die every day?”

He grinned and said that they celebrate death here. In his thirty five years of working in the same supervisory position, he confessed that he was frightened at first to live at the compound. But he decided to raise a family of five in the same building. Everyone at his home got used to sickly bodies and soiled sheets. The screams of pain became background noise, like the constant horns of vehicles they could hear outside the gate. Gradually, many priests began to live here too. Before Rajni left, Vishnu handed over Shamaldas’s letter to her saying that the mail man hadn’t come that day. He requested her to post it herself when she finds a mail box outside. Rajni placed the letter inside the handbag. She was curious as the letter had an address of some place in Bhopal and as per her knowledge; the Patels did not have any connection in that city. Besides, her father was not fond of writing letters. He never wrote a letter even when he travelled abroad on a business trip leaving behind their entire family for a month or two.

Aditya called in the evening at the hotel to talk to Rajni.

“Aditya, are you coming?”

“No Didi. I won’t. Because I know that old man won’t die. He is a hypocrite. All he wants is to cling to life as long as he can and order around people.”

“That old man is also your father. Can’t you be grateful once for what you have received?”

“Our father has kept some properties for himself so that his living expenses could be taken care of. You know, old age has its own problems. I haven’t even asked for my share because I don’t need it.” Rajni said in a stern manner, devoid of any warmth.

“It’s the son who inherits all the wealth.”

Rajni didn’t chide him on his regressive ideas. She also didn’t say that he shouldn’t have been given a penny when he refused to care for his father and abandoned him. She told him instead that their father remembered him and wanted to see him one last time before he died.

 “Let him die without seeing me. I am not coming.” And he hung up the phone as curtly as he had slammed the door in their last meeting four years back.

Unlike Rajni, Aditya was given love, attention and family resources unsparingly and he took it all for granted. Rajni on the other hand had to go over a distance to gain her share of love and attention. She scored higher than her brother, did everything he couldn’t do in their childhood like fetching a thing from upstairs in dark for her mother, bargaining with a vendor, maintaining a good student image throughout her school years to get validation from her parents.

While growing up, she often wondered if her father loved her at all. She envied Aditya for the way Shamaldas pined for him. She wanted to tell her father that his son didn’t deserve his affection after abandoning him. She hadn’t confronted him earlier for she lacked courage but now it was more to protect the tenuous relationship they had come to build in last few decades more out of the necessity of the situation than for its own accord. Shamaldas was self-absorbed in his youth and constantly travelled to expand his business. When his first wife died during the childbirth, he was trading automobile parts with a dealer in Chennai. The second wife, Rajni’s mother, was fifteen years younger than him and had studied up to the third grade. She read him newspapers in the morning when he was in his eighties and could no longer read. When Rajni’s mother died a decade back, Shamaldas didn’t show any sign of grief and hired Lachho to fill the void. He read newspapers for him, massaged his feet, walked him to the park and bought necessary things from market. Lachho came everyday at seven in the morning on his black bicycle which he had purchased in second hand from a milk man.

“Bhaiya, how much would you charge for the boat ride?” Rajni wanted to see Varanasi and decided to take a tour of the Ganges River to witness the activities along the city's ghats. She wanted to witness diyas, burning day and night, and the sounds of brass bells and incantations to soothe her agitated mind.

“Two rupees. I am also a guide and have studied Upanishads from my uncle. I can explain the history of this place for an additional payment of two rupees.”

“What’s your name?”

“Ram Manohar”

“You are a good salesman for sure.” said Rajni giving him additional two rupees. Rajni sat on the edge of a boat and picked up a floating marigold from the river.

“Didi, this is a city of death. I see bodies blanketed by white shrouds and orange marigolds on these Ghats everyday. Funeral pyres burn nonstop here, melting human flesh on piles of mango wood. My uncle who works at this Ghat as a priest told me that around thirty thousand bodies are burnt at this Ghat every year. Thousands of people come to bathe in the Ganges. It’s a good business. My entire family makes their living from death. Last year, some Japanese tourists came just to see the rituals.” The guide recited the speech he must have used before hundreds of tourists. Rajni observed his yellowish teeth and bleached white shirt which blended well with the background of almost the same colors of buildings around.

I can also show you best shops to shop Banarasi silk sarees.” He said pointing his finger towards series of small shops surrounded by dilapidated buildings with narrow staircases.

“I don’t need to buy this time.”

“Didi, Prem Chand, Tulsi Das, Sitar maestro - Ravi Shankar, Ustad Bismillah Khan, are all related to this city in one way or the other. This city is compared to the supreme reality - brahman, one which is without expansion or contraction, without change, without any form, unmanifest which encompasses everything and is everywhere.” In between their conversation, Rajni read lines of poet Kabir on one of the buildings they passed.

Seeing the grinding stone turning, turning,

Kabir began to weep.

Between the two stones, not a single grain is saved!

Rajni thought that no matter how fiercely her father clutches to life, he will have to let it go one day. On her way back to Moksha Bhavan, she saw a mail box and remembered to post her father’s letter. Before she could post the letter, the letter escaped her hands and fell in mud. She wiped the mud with the end of her saree and couldn’t help but open the letter.

The letter was addressed to Jaanu. It was a nickname and before she read the entire letter, she scanned it again to see if it contained lady’s real name on it. To her disappointment it didn’t. She sat down on the large stone under the tree and began reading it.

I am writing this letter as much to for my own peace of mind as to soothe you. I am sorry to let you down sixty five years ago. I don’t know if this will make you feel any better but I have not loved anyone as much as I have loved you. Two marriages, children, grand children, success in business world, nothing could ever come close to the happiness I felt with you. Look here I am, still a coward and don’t have even guts to put your name on my will in my last time. Honour is the most useless of the societal invention but having carried the weight of it all these years, I am incapable of unburdening myself now. I am dying. No matter how the world perceives me after my death, I know within my heart that I am a failure. There is no greater misery than that of living an unauthentic life. At least, you remained true to your love for me and waited for me all these years. I know that you would be able to die peacefully. I hope our daughter and you are well. Please forgive me, if you can. 

 When Rajni returned to Moksha Bhavan room, she saw Lachho stroking her father’s feet.

“He was breathless earlier and then he said he had a burning sensation in his legs and hands.” Lachho said massaging Shamaldas’s feet with petroleum jelly.

“Give him whatever he wants. I want to see my son. I don’t want you to keep anything for me. The gold is dust for me if I don’t get to see my son at my last moment. Call him and tell him I want to see him. His father is waiting for him.” Shamaldas said with tears in his eyes.

Rajni went to the reception to make a call to Aditya. She wondered if she should say anything about the letter to Aditya or Navin. She asked her brother to come at the earliest and told him that he would get whatever he wants. Aditya had agreed to come the day after. Rajni felt uneasy about the letter she read.

“I spoke to Aditya, he is coming the day after.” Rajni said.

As soon as Shamaldas heard this news, he sat on his bed for the first time in past four days and demanded to watch some TV. The anchor was voicing his opinion on India’s economic crisis.

Shamaldas listened attentively. He clapped and blurted out,“End of license raj. Finally we have got common sense. There is still a long way to go.” Shamaldas said as if he was participating in the debate on the TV. It was evident that the change in his disposition was not due to turn in India’s economic policy but because Aditya had consented to visit him after all these years.

“Papa, you should sleep now.” Rajni said getting up from her seat. He started chanting Sanskrit mantras, closed his eyes and gave his glasses to his daughter to put away.

All she wanted to do at that time was to send away Lachho outside the room and ask her father about the letter. She knew that doing so would make him feel worse and so she continued pretending as if she knew nothing. She didn’t see a point in burdening someone else with this secret either which would remain with her all her life. She thought that if her father can’t have peace at the end of his life, at least he deserved his good name to be continued after he was gone.

Rajni woke to the tune of bhajans. In an hour, Aditya arrived.

“Didi, how is he?” Aditya asked putting down his small suitcase.

“He is doing much better since he heard you’re coming to see him.”

“Beta, you have come. Sit beside me.” Shamaldas said, putting his hands on Aditya’s shoulder.

Shamaldas asked about his daughter in law and kids. He asked if Aditya’s son still played Hockey and if there house renovation was complete.

“Rajni, bring something to eat for your brother. I will eat Jalebi today. Beta, in old age, what can you want more than seeing the person you love the most? Mostly, it’s love that nourishes us in this age.” Shamaldas said.

“Papa, you know, I can’t let you stay at my place. We can’t take care of you.” Aditya moved away from his bed and sat on the chair.

“Beta, but you can visit me often, can’t you?”

“We have met now, what’s the point? I left an important meeting to come here. I will be leaving by tonight.” He said eating his golden brown jalebis and relishing as if he was in a restaurant. They heard a shriek of an old woman in the next room in between their conversation. There was a crowd of half a dozen people outside the adjoining room.

“Son, I have asked Rajni to give you whatever you want. Tell my daughter-in-law that it’s for her.”

“Papa, I am going to Burma next week to evaluate export possibilities. My business incurred loss last year. I need to find new markets for my product.”

“I am going to freshen up.” Aditya said getting up. He whispered to her sister that their father looked perfectly healthy to him.

“You seem to be disappointed to see him doing well.” Rajni said in a sarcastic tone, looking at Aditya with her piercing gaze.

“Not disappointed, but a person should go when his time comes. He is ninety-eight now. How long would anyone want to take care of him? He is like my five year old son. When someone gives him money on Diwali, he says no for a couple of times before accepting the money. Why this hypocrisy when you want it so badly? Our father says no to life but seeing his appetite for it, I don’t think he means what he says about dying.”

“I knew my son will come to see me.” Shamaldas told Lachho.

First time in last four months, Shamaldas got up from his bed on his own. He began exercising with the support of a chair. He rotated his neck clockwise and counterclockwise, then rotated his hands in the same way. His white dhoti opened up during this movement. He turned around and fastened his dhoti again and started lifting his legs one by one like an army man. Rajni wondered if the man in front of her and the one who wrote that letter were the same man.

“Beta Rajni, give me my shawl. I am a bit cold.” Shamaldas requested in his stentorian voice. Rajni opened the chest where she had kept Shamaldas’s clothes. She brought a pair of new clothes in case he died and needed to be changed into them. She fumbled to find a shawl but instead saw her father’s Nehru jacket.

Rajni still remembered hiding dried fruits in the pockets of Shamaldas’s Nehru jacket to eat later. She stole one rupee and sixty paisa for a movie. With a college identity card she got twenty paisa back which she spent on a plate of samosa during the break. Aditya got Rs. 5 in packet money. Rajni knew she deserved as much money as Aditya received and so she found various ways of securing money. Sometimes her grandmother gave her money but for the most part, she took it from her father’s wallet without telling him.

Rajni calculated a rough amount her father would require to live at his current standard of living. She decided to sell some of her mutual funds from the portfolio she had built over the years while teaching in a high school. Rajni had taught for almost a decade. She wasn’t passionate about teaching from the start, but she liked being independent. She had invested in mutual funds, silver and gold to diversify the risk. Investing was one of the skills she had picked up from her father. Navin insisted for paying for their house, car and all the other expenses and so her investments had remained untouched all these years.

Having nothing else to do, Rajni often asked Vishnu questions whenever she saw him in the corridor.

“Vishnuji, isn’t it strange that people believe that dying in this place can free them from the circle of life and death?”

“It’s a matter of belief. You must have faith on what you cannot grasp with your mind.” Vishnu said in his tranquil voice. His bright eyes and calm mannerism reflected the wisdom he carried in his heart. Rajni found herself listening to the tales of dying men and women from the man who had witnessed death of thousands of people.

While leaving Moksh Bhavan Rajni came to Vishnu to handover the key of their room.

“You were right in your prediction about my father. His health, in fact, has improved since we came here.” Rajni said smiling.

On the fifteenth day, Rajni, Shamldas and Lachho settled in a black Ambassador car and left for Indore. Shamaldas insisted on wearing his thick glasses to see verdant fields outside. They stopped at the hotel at night for dinner and to rest for a couple of hours. Shamaldas demanded to eat Khaman, a side dish he was fond of.  Rajni fed him with a spoon and Shamaldas finished half plate of Khaman covered in coriander and sesame. He was adept at chewing food with his gums. He had refused to wear denture for years and preferred soft food he could chew easily. His bald head, massaged with almond oil, Rajni noticed, shone under the red and yellow lights of the highway hotel.

In the morning when Rajni saw prayer beads lying under Shamaldas’ bed, she tried to put them back in his hands. He did not respond. His eyes lay closed and mouth slightly open. She knew Aditya was in Burma and out of reach. She had brought a white sari even when she didn’t believe her father could die this time. They went back to Varanasi for the funeral. She could have called Navin but Rajni had decided that she wanted to light the fire on her father’s funeral pyre herself. It was so rare for a lady to perform this ritual that priests around the Ghat approached and asked if there was no other male company who could perform the rights. When her mother had died, she had stood away from the funeral pyre and didn’t have courage to go closer. She saw her father’s half opened mouth for the last time and wondered if he wanted to say something to her. She lit the fire with trembling hands in presence of priests chanting matras and waited for flames to evaporate the vestige of her father’s physical form. Later, she dispersed his ashes in Ganges and wandered around the congested streets of Varanasi; the chaos of the city brought a strange sort of relief. 

