From: Nandita Dutta<nandita@dearcinema.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Salma
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

It stood at the end of a busy Brixton street lined with high-end retail stores and upscale restaurants. The modest outlet was even functionally named: Indian Streetfood Takeaway. The menu was scribbled with coloured markers on hazy glass windows. It could have easily been mistaken for a warehouse, which is what it used to be, before its owner decided there was more profit in selling food than hardware. Anyone with the slightest idea about India would have known that biryani and curry were as far from being street food as the owner from being Indian. He was, in fact, a stout and affable middle-aged Pakistani man named Sadiq, who could be seen hunched forward proudly over his creations: vegetable and meat curries, biryani, kebabs, vegetable and lamb samosas. He had trained as a chef in Lahore before he moved to London fourteen years ago. Although he’d put minimal effort into the aesthetic, there was no doubt that he poured his heart into cooking.

When it began to thrive on a loyal clientele of homesick Indian students and busy office-goers, Sadiq could be seen complaining to his customers about how badly he needed a helping hand. He told them that his wife, bed-ridden with sciatica, was of no avail. Finally he seemed happy that his wife had sent for her sister. This is how Salma arrived in London. Salma - Bachelor of Home Science from Government College in Lahore; noticeable for her seductive laughter that reverberated around the takeaway, and the portable radio that had travelled from Lahore to keep her company. For the first few weeks, she worked quietly in the kitchen; chopping vegetables, kneading the dough and washing the dishes. Her movements were elegant, her voice gentle, in contrast to her clumsy brother-in-law, who was nothing but kind and fatherly to her. “Beta, make them hot-hot naan please,” he would call out as she rolled out triangles of dough and tossed them into the tandoor.

One day, while Sadiq was taking an order for a birthday party on the phone, a new customer walked in. “Salma beta, attend to this customer please,” he called out. Hands covered with dough, Salma peeked out of the kitchen to see a young South-Asian girl studying the display. Salma had never interacted with a customer before. Hesitating, she washed her hands, taking care to get rid of each and every particle of dough lodged under her nails, hoping her brother-in-law would be through with the call by then. But Sadiq spoke again, more agitated, “Salma, the customer is waiting!” So she finally came out.

“Just a moment ...,” the girl hesitated.

Salma took in her coffee-brown complexion, kohl-rimmed eyes, curly hair and the delicate mole perched on her upper lip.

“I think…I will go for the biryani,” she sighed.

Biryani ... after all this deliberation! Salma said internally. To the girl, she asked, “Chicken or lamb?”

“Lamb please.”

Salma picked up a plastic container and filled it with scoops of aromatic biryani, feeling Sadiq’s eyes on her. “Beta, put in more pieces of lamb,” he prodded, “always think about what makes the customer happy.” Salma squeezed a few more in. “Is this enough?” she turned to her brother-in-law, her ironic tone unmissable. “More than enough!” the girl, who had been following their conversation in Urdu, pitched in.

Salma blushed.

“How much?” the girl asked.

“Five pounds,” Salma answered, “...please,” she added as an afterthought; but it came out loud and emphatic.

Their eyes met for the first time and they both broke into laughter, the kind that instantly establishes a bond between two people. They went from being strangers to familiars, created over their shared understanding of an unintended joke.

Sadiq noticed it too. To honour that bond, he offered her a discount.

The following afternoon, she returned and leaned over the counter with an air of familiarity to buy an assortment of curries. Recognizing her voice, Salma peeped out of the kitchen. But the girl didn’t spot her. She thanked Sadiq and left when other customers began to line up.

After two months there, Salma still preferred the kitchen where she could put on the radio and work at her own rhythm without dealing with strangers. She had been reduced to tears a few times by testy customers. Once she reached a deadlock with a white man after making him repeat ten times the kind of sauce he wanted with his kebab. He finally gave up and left. When she narrated this incident, sobbing intermittently, Sadiq laughed and chided her playfully for losing a customer.

Fridays were the hardest for her. Before her arrival, Sadiq would close the takeaway in the afternoon and go to mosque. But now, he entrusted Salma with the business. He returned leisurely after catching up with friends after namaz; even bringing them along for hot snacks and tea.

There was a particular group who irked Salma no end. The Turkish, Algerian and fellow Pakistani shopkeepers from the neighbourhood would drop by on the pretext of chit-chatting with Sadiq or buying a snack. They would inevitably throw suggestive glances at her or try to flirt. Sometimes Sadiq picked up on her discomfort and got rid of them; other times, he regaled them with stories and free food. There was one man in particular that Salma resented – a Pakistani corner shop owner named Farhan, who flirted shamelessly, partly encouraged by Sadiq, who perhaps saw him as an eligible suitor.

Young and nimble, not more than twenty-two, Farhan had a habit of drifting in from his shop two buildings away. He seemed to have an opinion on everything - from London real estate to Pakistani politics – and a need to express it. Whenever the men assembled to talk, Farhan’s voice was the loudest. But Salma saw through his flamboyance; a cover for his lack of real depth. Much as she disliked it, he always found an excuse to summon her out of the kitchen. But the harder he tried, the more she was repulsed.

However, there was one regular customer of the takeaway who Salma didn’t mind at all.

“You know why our food tastes better? Because we use high quality oil...not like other takeaways...you can see their lamb pieces floating in rivers of cheap oil,” Salma heard and immediately put the kettle on. Five minutes later, she emerged with three cups of chai.

Thanks to Sadiq’s generosity, this had become their ritual. Whenever the Indian girl visited – every fourth day – Salma happily made chai for her because that sweet and milky concoction was what she missed the most. They would sip leisurely – sometimes with samosas – and chat. She would ask Sadiq his life story and he would spin heroic tales about what Salma knew was quite an ordinary life. However, at times, Salma learnt new things. For instance, that for the first few months at the takeaway he had stubbornly used only expensive pure ghee to cook, until he’d run into losses and had to switch to vegetable oil.

The girl would, in turn, tell them funny stories about her foul-tempered grandmother, who had also been born in Lahore before Partition. Their stories were interrupted by other customers but never lost their flow.

While they drank chai that day, Salma complimented the girl on how long her hair had grown since she’d first seen her. Almond oil before washing, she promptly said. Encouraged, Salma asked her next how her eyebrows were always in shape, given that London beauty salons were so expensive. She did it herself at home, the girl answered. She offered to do it for her as well. Salma blushed. Her English was getting better, the girl praised. She listened to BBC radio every day, Salma giggled.

The girl held forth in smooth, fluent English while Salma’s sentences were unsure and unsteady. But they communicated a lot through smiles; and Salma, otherwise self-conscious and soft-spoken, laughed with a seductive joy. Sadiq never accepted money from the girl for the chai.

That day, Sadiq left for Friday prayers and came back with five friends in the middle of an urgent discussion. They dragged out chairs and congregated around one table, speaking in hushed tones. While warming up samosas for them, Salma strained to hear them. Initially mindful of her presence, they soon forgot her as the conversation soared to a feverish pitch amid gulps of tea. Salma turned the radio off and listened. Someone who prayed at the same mosque, a recently married young man, had jumped from his seventh floor apartment. One friend speculated that he was into men and couldn’t cope with his marriage. Another that he’d heard the man had a kafir boyfriend before he was forced into marriage to a girl from Pakistan by his family. All of them agreed what a terrible thing it was – for a man to love another man.

“To talk about the dead in this manner...!” Salma couldn’t conceal her contempt after they left.

Sadiq said nothing, only tallied the day’s earnings.

 “Why don’t they leave the poor man alone,” she muttered.

“Some things should be the way Allah has ordained them to be. There is no reason for you or anyone else to feel pity for that man,” Sadiq said, still staring at his calculator.

“But now the poor man is dead, is it right to badmouth him in the name of Allah, bhaijaan?”

“You stay out of it,” Sadiq ended the matter.

So she did. For the next few days, Salma barely spoke to her brother-in-law.

On the fourth day, the Indian girl returned. This time, Sadiq was out running errands, so Salma leapt out of the kitchen as soon as she heard her voice. However, the girl wasn’t looking for her. She was staring into the eyes of the man she’d walked in with. Salma’s face dropped. The man noticed her and said “Hello!”, then ordered two takeaway biryanis. Salma worked quietly, deliberately scooping more rice than lamb. She neither initiated a conversation nor offered them chai. The girl looked disappointed.

“Ten pounds, please,” Salma said, without looking up.

Her fingers slightly trembled as she took the note the girl held out for her.

A couple hours later, Sadiq returned with Farhan in tow. He’d just come back from visiting his family in Pakistan and had brought sweets for Salma. As he held the packets out for her with a flirty smile, Sadiq pitched in, “Maybe this will sweeten her mood after all.”

“I don’t like sweets, don’t you know that bhaijaan?” Salma spoke to Sadiq, polite yet vicious.

“Are you into savouries then?” Farhan joked.

Only Sadiq laughed.

“You have been acting too difficult with me, my love. Are you punishing this young and handsome man for showering you with all this attention?”

Salma was shocked by his audacity in front of her brother-in-law. But she soon regained her composure, “I never asked for your attention, did I? You both had better not build castles in the air. Now leave me alone. I have got work to do.”

Both Sadiq and Farhan stared at her incredulously. She retreated into the kitchen, eyes red with indignation and welling up.

Four months later, the Indian Streetfood Takeaway celebrated its anniversary. The walls received a fresh coat of paint and the scribblings on its windows were wiped clean. The new display menu was painted on a black board, hung over the counter and was full of words like okra, aubergine and chickpea which wouldn’t have made any sense to Salma. It bore the look of a place that was doing well. Sadiq could still be seen hunched forward proudly over the counter, chatting with customers. A meek and elderly Pakistani man worked quietly in the background, chopping vegetables and kneading the dough.

When customers asked about Salma, Sadiq promptly changed the subject. Farhan still dropped by - his visits much less frequent than before - but strangely Salma was never mentioned. However, the other local customers reminisced about what a beauty she was. Some even missed the sound of her laughter.

There were rumours that circulated behind Sadiq’s back. Some said that he and his wife had packed Salma off to Lahore because she had created trouble at the takeaway. Others that she’d been given in marriage to a Pakistani man against her wishes. A scandalizing rumour was occasionally heard that not even Sadiq actually knew where Salma was because she’d eloped with a Bangladeshi girl who’d been seen at the takeaway a few times.

The Indian girl, who still stopped by to buy food every now and then, heard the rumour too. She knew – in the way you sometimes just know – that it was true. She’d seen it in Salma’s eyes, the very first time their eyes had met, when she was still learning to add please to her sentences. She’d known it when Salma had once asked her what her religion said about men loving men. She’d felt it when she had stopped talking to her after she had visited the takeaway with Tom, her classmate. She knew it and that made Salma’s absence a little disquieting for her. How she wished she had got to know her better! 

