From: Aditi Bhadwalkar<aditibhadwalkar01@gmail.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Doors to the Closet
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

They say "qubool hai" is the beginning of a great married life...in my case
the word was "qubool nahi"...!

No doubt Rahul was a good person. Tall,dark,handsome,RICH,single child and
of course bearing the "I am an Engineer" status!

To turn down the marriage, Rahul was not even a person who came into my
life surprisingly.

We knew each other since our junior college days. Reaching my 20's this was
a name I had to get used to.

"So Ria,whats cooking between you two?"

"You guys look so good together!!"

"Beta you should think about it, we can talk to his parents,I am sure he
likes you already"


This was so frequent and normal, I had already made it a part of my daily
routine and learned to ignore the topic with grace!


Knowing the above things,one might say...then why the rejection...why such
a strong retaliation!!!


Well..the story of Rejection was not an overnight affair, this one had
taken its roots ever since I turned 18!

A responsible citizen, an adult now, no worries about the age-bar limit
anymore!


This was the time I started thinking about myself more than often..because
confusion seeped in even more!

No..I did not have identity crisis..I rather had sexuality crisis!



When people of my age were eager to show off their guys,I was busy fighting
my own devils!

It took me a lot of time and courage to accept the fact that I was
different than others.

My preference for a partner was not someone who belonged to the opposite
gender!


One fine evening when I was just sitting around, looking out of the window,
not to mention that the questions were still playing a havoc in my mind.

I had my sister's friend come over to our house.


Now this friend of hers was known to be an epitome of beauty!
Watching her into action, I just couldn't stop appreciating and gazing
her...she had the best features for a girl!

That was a time a thought crossed in my mind, if I am appreciating her in
an unusual way!?..Maybe this is more than normal.

YES girls do appreciate other girls!(Well..the times are rare though)
But with this behavior of mine I realized the level of abnormality!
Okay, I did not go forward and continue thinking about this so called
"small incident"


But sure mind had its doubts and questions prepared to fire!

Shruti was the only way I thought..this chick knew everything about my
life!!!

She could be my mind reader…also if required my secret-keeper!

I told her about my turmoil...and left her stunned as well!


But yes as expected she was supportive also inquisitive lot!

In a few days time she could fix me up with another girl who wandered
through similar thoughts (I wonder from where she found her)






Noorie was a total opposite to me...Frank,Bold,Stunning and Short-tempered
Everything was opposite!!


We met on a date
The kind of shy person that I am, I must have left a really bad first
impression I thought.

But Noorie hadn't failed to impress me!
I kept thinking about her for god knows how many days after the meet!

When later , in a couple of days my cell phone flashed her name again
I was over-enjoyed.
It marked the beginning of an end for me: my sexuality crisis had
ended..and this time I was sure about it!

No doubt 20's is the most craved for age group...
You tend to be free from worries and don't care about people around you!


I thought everything would be fine since my internal questions have resided.


The questions were defeated but the battle was about to begin!


Surprisingly me being a Lesbian ( Yes I do accept the word now )
was not a matter of worry for me. I never found myself cursing for being
different about it...or maybe Noorie was the reason.
She was so bold as a person, she taught me to accept the same thing with
pride!
We started meeting out more often.
Hanging around more than usual.
How could people around us not question?
Forget about the society.
The difficult part was to deal with the person I shared roof with.
My very own Mother!
She managed to find a sweet spare time and directly bombarded questions
which started with "Is it", "Are you" and "What If".
I knew it was the right time (there couldn't be any time right to reveal
this thing by the way!)
So I spoke my heart out!
She kept quiet as expected...
But then did something totally unusual...
"We are talking to Rahul's family tomorrow itself!!!" Came a sharp reply!


I could sense the tremors, my world was about to crumble!


The next few months were the most horrible days of my life.
Just like Cancer the news begin to spread.
Slowly and protectively.
My father and my sister were a part of this secret!


Rahul and his family of course were miles apart!


Not to mention the phase of my "rishta" decision went along very well!


Rahul always had a heart for me, I knew it and I was right!
I wish he had proved me wrong!


Both the families were eager about the wedding...
I mean Oh My God! Who does that...the talking terms and the dates of
wedding didn't even had a breathing time between them!
That entire phase had crushed my soul a big time!


I hadn't seen Noorie all those days
I refrained from picking up her calls
Meeting her would have been my ultimate weakness hence for so many days I
kept her away...I kept my own self away!
When I realized I was broken enough and when I couldn't even survive for a
single day was the time I decided to meet Noorie (for the last time maybe)

Noorie as expected was mad at me...but more than the anger, her concern had
priority!
I told her about everything... every single conversation that happened in
those entire months!
Every single move...details of every single minute!
She was listening to me quietly... patiently!
Not cutting my words...silently absorbing them!


When I was done..when I took my first breathe in few hours and took a
serious look at her face!


For the first time I saw her grow pink from a fair complexion...
The tears were so evident!
But she was prepared...she knew about this day!
The worst part was we never spoke about this day so seriously before!
" Ria, unlike me, you stay here with your family..you have the society with
you which you have to have to face.
I understand the things you are going through and realize that it's a tough
fight.
I do not and would never doubt your emotions.
But knowing your situation
I am leaving this completely for you.
You have my number
You know I will always be there
Do not expect me at your wedding
But I am just a call away, incase you change the decisions you have been
silently accepting"
Noorie was the best she could be...I should have been proud of her...but
was rather hurt and deceived
Because now I had seen another person sharing the same battle and dealing
it with all vigour.



That night I couldn't sleep...
I was done with the sleeping part...
Cause now was the time for me to wake up...

I called my parents and my sister the next day and gave a complete denial
for marriage!
It took me weeks to confront them.
Make them understand
Even quarrel and fight!
Whatever I did, however hard I tried I kept failing.
I kept loosing.

Until one day...
My father came upto me..
And in front of the entire family he claimed…
With this face at your wedding it's better that you go ahead with your own
decisions....!!

And.....
That was I thought the happiest day of my life!!!!!
Until....
I heard the following words
"Provided you promise to never show your face again"
Now was a time my world was literally crumbled!
A stack of cards could have taken more time to crash than my entire
existence!

For the next few days,
I did not see faces
I never came out of the room
I barely ate
I barely breathed
The only proof that I was alive were my blinking eyes which too had lost
their soul

The silver lining of the entire situation was...
After this I had nothing to lose
I had reached the ends
Seen the worst
And experienced a lot!

And you become your true self when you have nothing at stake!!!

So while I am writing this.
I am on a plane to visit Thailand...which I always wanted to for my
honeymoon
Yes
I finally said "qubool hai" after a strong "qubool nahi"

That night I called Noorie.
My call itself was a proof of my decision and she was just glad about it!
I met my parents and my sister of course
I told them about my decision...my choice
And also the fact, that this is was one thing I was born with and they
shouldn't be ashamed of cause I too have accepted it..gracefully!


I bid an adieu to them..promised to travel far so I would keep them out of
the society gossips.
But yes the fact that I am just a call away was convinced.


I know it takes time to accept a different individual, we are so used to
the regular and normal life!
It took me years and real hard moments to accept my difference
I sure could give my family their own time!

I took my sweet time to bid adieu to my place...my house!

Me and Noorie met Shruti before starting the new phase of our life!

The next week we even got married!

Me, Noorie and Shruti the only people around
We got married the Christian style as I had always dreamt of!
Two beautiful brides...white envious gowns!!!
A relation to start
A new life to begin
A new phase to look up to
A new happiness to cuddle
An old tradition to break
A society yet to conquer!!!!!



