From: Rosemary Thomas<roses.mary@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Sr. Marianne and the Cause of Death
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Sr. Marianne walked around the tiny women’s ‘ward’. It had 3 rickety beds covered with mosquito nets. Uma had been here for three days. She was brought by her husband and son on a charpoy, shivering with fever and showing clear symptoms of malaria.

Her ‘nursing aide’, Deepa, had done the standard treatment under Sister’s supervision and Uma was much better now. Sr. Marianne was quite proud of Deepa.

So Deepa wasn’t a qualified nurse yet. So what? She did everything perfectly. Clean, neat movements. And she was even stricter than Sister about sterility. She was so much better than the B.Sc. Nurses who came from the cities for experience. Their certificates weren’t worth even to mop up a bed-pan spill.



“Sister, someone has come!” Deepa called, interrupting her thoughts.

Sr. Marianne walked quickly to their ‘consultation room’, a small room with a table, chair and bed. The Sister Doctor met the patients there once a week and Sr. Marianne managed on the other days.

“Who is it, Deepa?”

Deepa looked terrified. “Someone from the government, Sister. He is asking many questions. He asked me what I have studied.”

Fear welled up inside. Oh God, what is this now? Are they here to inspect us? Have I paid all the needed taxes?

She put on her most confident smile and met him at the door.

“Good morning, Mr?”

“Mr. Jha. Manoj Kumar Jha. I am from the District Registering Authority and I represent the State Council for Clinical Establishment,” he beamed, thrilled with his long designation.

“Come in, please. Take a seat.”

My God, what has he come for? I will offer him tea and pakoda. Ayyo… I hope Deepa didn’t say anything.

“Sister-ji. I have come to—”

“Sir, why don’t we have tea first? Our Sonu will make some pakodas. You prefer aloo? Or pyaas? What do you like?”

Mr. Jha smiled and rested his hand on his tummy, as if taking formal approval from it.

“Of course Sister-ji. Tea would be excellent. Aloo, Sister. Let us have aloo. Yes, that will be best,” he rolled his head from side to side, agreeing with himself on his excellent choice.



As Sr. Marianne arranged the cups, saucers and paper napkins, she kept a prayer going under her breath.

Lord, let him be understanding. 

Grant him the serenity to accept the things I cannot change. 

Grant him the wisdom to close his eyes to things that do not exist. 

And grant him the courage to ignore the ridiculous parts of the law. 

Please Lord, let him be understanding. 



She placed a steaming cup of adrak-chai in front of him along with a plate of crisp pakodas. The smell of the fried besan and bits of green chilli filled the room. Mr. Jha nodded approvingly to himself. Yes. Aloo had indeed been the right choice.



“So, Mr. Jha. What is this District Agency?”

His brow furrowed.

“Not District Agency! District Registering Authority of the State Council for Clinical Establishment.”

“Yes, yes, that only.”

“Sister, you don’t know about the Clinical Establishment Act?” Mr. Jha seemed personally offended about this.

“I’m sorry, Mr. Jha. I don’t have much time here to read or watch TV. Please tell me about it.”

He puffed up his chest and looked sternly at her.

“Sister, you are doing good work here. I know that you take care of the people in all the villages nearby. But you need to be registered and adhere to the Minimum Standards. Ok?”

“Ok, Mr. Jha. How do we register?”

“You have to apply using this form,” he took out a thick form and handed it to her.

“You will get provisional registration first and then, permanent registration. Now, there are things you need to do in this center. You need to have a bigger signage with the name of the clinic in the local language –”

“We have a board, sir – ”

“Not big enough! Please don’t interrupt me, Sister. You also need to display the name and registration number of your doctor, along with the fee structure. Oh, and also the timings of the clinic.”

Sr. Marianne wondered idly whether she should write midnight to midnight or 9 am to 8:59 am since the center was open 24 hours to anyone who needed it. She also wondered whether to tell him that she and Deepa were the full-time ‘doctors’.

Oh Lord, forgive me. I will try not to tell any lies. I will only neglect to mention certain things.

“Sister, are you listening to me?”

“Of course I am.”

“Then tell me, who is your doctor and when does he come?”

Ok. No need to wonder anymore. She would have to tell the truth.

“Mr. Jha, our Sister Doctor Krupa comes here once a week from our hospital in Koderma. The community knows her days and they come on that day. But sir, we do not have a full-time doctor. We have been trying for a long time but no one is willing to come and work in such a small, rural place.”

Should I go further? The Lord said the truth will set you free. Only, in this case, the truth will maybe put me in jail.

“Sir, even in the Government PHC, there is no full time doctor. They are also trying for a long time.”

Mr. Jha first looked indignant, then embarrassed.

So this new Act applied to the Government also. She felt happy for a moment – how misery loves company – and then immediately felt guilty for being happy.

“Sir, I’m sorry. We are not trying to break the law, but you know that doctors and nurses don’t want to come and work here. We are willing to pay even. But they won’t come.”

“Sister, this is a problem, I know. But you cannot prescribe and dispense medicines. There is no compromise on that. I will be back in a month’s time to check.”

Sr. Marianne was bewildered. Would a doctor come riding on the clouds in a month’s time?

“Ok, Sister. Now this girl, Deepam? Is she a nurse?”

Deep sigh. The Lord was out to test her today.

“Deepa. No sir. She is not. She is doing her 12th exams this year through distance education. I teach her every evening. Once she completes that, we will send her for B.Sc. nursing at our own college.”

“12th exams?! How old is she then? How can you allow her to take care of patients?!”

“She is 22. Her parents couldn’t send her to school after 6th standard. She came here to help with the nursery children but she is very smart and really good with the patients. So we are teaching her. I am sorry, sir. But you know getting qualified nurses to such a small center is very difficult.”

“Sister, this cannot continue. I cannot allow this. If the Sister Doctor is coming once a week, that is a temporary solution but allowing a completely unqualified girl to take care of patients? Impossible!”

“Sir, I am a fully qualified nurse. I have 20 years of experience. She never does any procedure without my supervision. But I have taught her to change dressings, take temperature, take BP – only the simple things.”

Sister decided not to mention that Deepa was fully capable of handling a normal delivery by herself. Lord, there is a limit even to telling the truth. I don’t want to be set that free.

“I’m sorry, Sister. I just cannot allow this. You are putting the patients in danger.”

This was too much.

“Sir, what about the qualified nurses who don’t know the difference between an IV and an injection? They have never even seen a patient! I would never allow such a girl to touch my patients. I care for the people as my own family. If I say Deepa can do something, it is because I have trained her to do it 200 times with me. I would never put my patients in danger!

“Or else, you give me a qualified nurse who will work like that. I will send Deepa away. When will you give?”

Mr. Jha pushed his chair back, got up quickly and moved to the door.

“Ok, Sister, ok. Here is a document with all the details about how to apply. My number also is there. I will come after a month. Please do the needful. Thank you. Bye.” With that, he grabbed the last pakoda, strode out and was driving away before Sister could react.



1 month later 



Sr. Marianne sat at Maya’s side and checked her blood pressure. It was slightly high but nothing to worry about. Maya had come in a few hours ago when her contractions had started. They were closer now and it would soon be time for delivery. Sister was keeping close watch and talking to Maya about her two older children to keep her distracted from the pain.



Deepa came running to the door.

“Sister, that government man! He has come again!”

Oh God, why now? Maya’s baby is about to come!

“Deepa, go and bring the clean towels. And make sure hot water is getting ready.”

“Ok, Sister.” Deepa ran off to the kitchen.



“Mr. Jha, good afternoon, how are you? I submitted the form for provisional registration. Did you get it? See, I have also put a signboard with the timings and our Sister Doctor’s name.”

I need to distract him and send him away quickly. I have to get back to Maya.

“Sister, I got your form. We will be giving provisional registration soon.”

“We will sit in the consultation room. I am sorry I cannot offer you tea this time. We have a delivery patient and there isn’t much time left.”

“A delivery! But, Sister, is the doctor here? How can you do this without the doctor? And why hasn’t she gone to the PHC?”

“Sir, they are scared to go to the PHC. Anyway, this is her third delivery and everything is normal. The baby is in good position and I am keeping track of everything. Deepa will help me.”

Oh no… why did I say that?

“Deepa? That child? I told you she can’t do anything here! What if there is an emergency? This is exactly why we have the Clinical Establishment Act!”

Sr. Marianne could sense her patience leaking away.

“If there is an emergency, we will call Dr. Krupa. Or we will take her to the town hospital. Her family cannot afford to take a vehicle to the town hospital, and there are no buses at this time. This is not the first delivery I am handling, Mr. Jha. Otherwise, you bring me a doctor. I will assist any doctor you bring.”

“Sister, I told you last time! You cannot continue like this!”

Ok, enough is enough. Lord, forgive me for what I am about to do.

“Ok, sir. You tell me what to do. Shall I close down the center?”

Sr. Marianne went to the door and called, “Deepa! Deepa! Come here. Send away all the patients. Tell Maya to go home at once. We don’t have permission.” She knew Deepa would never send the patients home.

Mr. Jha smiled uncomfortably. “Heh heh, Sister, don’t make jokes. But you must try to understand my situation.”

Sr. Marianne came and sat at the table. She opened the drawer and took out a form.

“So, I have to make the discharge certificate. So under recommendations, should I write ‘recommended by District Registering Authority’ or ‘Clinical Establishment Act’? What is correct, sir?”

“Sister, what are you doing?”

“And if something goes wrong, god forbid,” she made the sign of the cross, “under ‘cause of death’, I’ll put Mr. Manoj Kumar Jha. It is J-H-A, no?”

“Sister, we will talk about this later. I have to go now, ok? Bye.”
