From: Tanmoy Biswas<tanmoybiswas1986@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Trans
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

He rushes out of his classroom. Then the staircase. Then the long corridor to the main gate where darwanji Pramod da sits on his chair. Now the gate is open. The electric bell is ringing. Last period has just got over. Boys are coming out of the classrooms in frantic haste. Though not as hurriedly as he does. Everyday. The fear starts slowly clouding his mind in the last period. Fear and rage. Anticipation of the unpleasant minutes he takes to come out of his classroom, leap downstairs and walk as fast as he can jostling with the gathering crowd to reach the main gate. All the while exposed to nasty jeer. Eyes violent with suppressed mockery. Random remarks passed by boys known and unknown. He seems to be known to all. “Ladies.” “Girly.” “The chakka from 11 th.” Some days something more prolonged. “Come sister, I’ll drop you home,” once a senior dada said and burst into laughter with his peers. Another day, another group of seniors surrounded him, “Come babe, will take a selfie with you. You’re the only chick in this boys’ school.” Today, like any other day, he walks as fast as he can to the main gate trying to escape the daily ordeal. His slender waist and butt sway with the beauty and oddity of the walk of an effeminate boy of sixteen.

He tries though. To walk ‘normal’. Maa often says, “Behave ‘normal’; like baba; like other boys.” He tries but fails. Once he even fell while getting on a bus. He was with maa and trying hard to walk with a gait. He presumed that was the ‘normal’ way of walking prescribed to him. It feels bad too. Deep inside he feels a pang swelling up. “I don’t want to be like baba. I want to be like maa - walk like her, talk like her, look like her, in saree and red bindi.” Once boromama’s son, his senior cousin, tried to teach him how to walk like a man, “Bhai, see, walk parting your legs wider. Don’t keep the legs so close almost stuck to each other.” But walking that way made him feel more conscious of the presence of the thing hanging in between. And he always forces himself to ignore and forget its presence and think it is not there. Instead, he likes to imagine there is a crack, like the one he once saw in the little bathing daughter of Shyamali di. Between the little girl’s legs. He likes to bring his legs close to each other trying to cover up the nuisance in between and make it disappear. That is the only ‘normal’ he can think of.

He comes out of the school building. Outside there is the usual medley of guardians, boys in the sky-blue school uniform, drivers of vans and pull-cars, the school buses parked by the sidewalk and the autos and rickshaws and buses on the main road. In one corner of the sidewalk he can see Swapan da in his usual place. Swapan da is the fuchka seller. His glass box full of fuchkas and earthen pot of tamarind water are already surrounded by a glutton crowd. He shoots a furtive and greedy glance in that direction. He knows that he cannot join the crowd, stand and gobble fuchkas now. He would provoke a lot of attention and banter. He quickly gets into an auto. He has seen the auto-driver before. He is a regular passenger in this route. And he knows the auto-driver must have noticed him before. A middle aged, lean man with bald head. As he reaches his stop and gets off and goes near the driver on the front to pay the fare, the driver asks him, “Your name?” He replies. “Which class?” He says, “11 th.” The man looks at him, smiles affectionately and says in an elevated tone, “Study hard. H.S. is tough. I tried twice. Failed both the times. And see, today I’m pulling this vehicle. Job market is bad, very bad. Not easy to get a job if you do not have high degrees.” He pays his fare and collects the change. Before starting the auto again the driver suddenly lowers his voice and says in a hush-hush tone, “I’ve seen you before. You study in that big school. Then why walk and talk like the chakkas? Be good. Study. Be a doctor or engineer. Or an office guy in suit and tie. Don’t behave fifty-fifty type okay.” The auto leaves. He turns back and starts walking down the lane that leads home.

A round of harassment is awaiting him, he knows. On his way home he has to pass the clubhouse on one side and the open playground on another. Jubo Shongho is the local club. At this hour, young boys gather inside the clubroom to play carom. There are three carom boards inside the clubroom with orange bulbs hanging on top of each. Boys flock around them. On the playground boys gather to play cricket or football, even volleyball in the winter. As he nears the club and the playground he gets noticed. “There, our layla comes,” shouts a chubby boy in vest and barmuda shorts. The boy has come to collect the ball that came to the lane being kicked by someone in the playground. Other boys look at him with sprightly banter brightening their faces. Some of the boys come walking towards the lane. “Come, want to play football with us?” One boy jokes as another retorts, “He prefers rannabati, dude,” and everyone starts laughing out loud. “which house re?” a senior dada asks him. He does not reply and rushes home. His heart is beating fast and a gust of sob is fighting inside to find a vent. Suddenly he forgets the route or which house he has to reach. He stands still in the middle of the lane for a while, stupefied, not knowing where he belongs.

Today maa has cooked Alua maach. Insipid. Tasteless but cheap to buy. Baba has not got salary this month, he knows. Some nights back his parents were talking sitting on the bed in the tv room. The tv was on. His parents always talk with the tv on. Maybe that is what happens when two people love each other. They can hear each other even in the midst of blaring noise. Or maybe his parents feel shy to talk in secretive silence. Or perhaps after being together for so long, they find privacy unnecessary. He finds it ‘romantic’. He learnt the word ‘romantic’ from Leela di, his senior cousin. She told him her boyfriend was very ‘romantic’ and explained, “it means, full of love.” Sometimes while bathing, or at night when he is standing alone in the small balcony attached to their two-rented rooms on the first floor, he closes his eyes and murmurs softly as if it is a carefully-hidden secret, ‘romantic’ ‘romantic’. But that night what his parents were talking about was not ‘romantic’. His father was saying that he might lose the job. Boss lost interest in continuing with the small chartered farm since Boss’ son had committed suicide. As he heard baba saying so to maa he thought why Boss’ son committed suicide. Was he also like him!



Maa comes out of the kitchen and sits beside him on the floor. He continues eating from the thali. She looks at him. He does not say anything or look back to her. The tv is on. He watches the songs-on-demand program on the tv. Maa speaks, almost in a whisper, “The para boys were saying something, na re?” He nods. She starts patting his back softly, “I say something. You’ll listen to me.” On the tv the Shaptapadi movie song starts, “Ei poth Jodi na shesh hoy...” The duet sung by the lovers on bike. The song reminds him of Anjan da. Khuku jethi’s son. They stay in the next house. Anjan da has a bike. Everyday in the evening when Anjan da returns home from work, he jumps to the window getting the sound of Anjan da’s bike and secretly watches. His room has a narrow bed, a study-table and a window with a view of the lane below. The window in the tv room has a view of the club and the playground. Before entering house Anjan da parks his bike, opens his helmet and looks into the bike mirror. Then Anjan da sets his hairs with his hands. He feels to rush to Anjan da and shout, “Anjan da, you’re handsome, as handsome as Ranvir Singh in Rand laga de!”

“Hearing or not? I’m saying something,” maa insists. “Yes, tell,” he is back to now-and-here. “Sumita mashi came today morning. After you left for school,” maa is speaking in a tone mellow with all the indulgence she is capable of showing. Her hand is patting his back affectionately. ‘So Sumita mashi was saying,” but he snaps before maa can finish. “What was she saying?” He sounds wary. He knows very well how all their relatives never stop talking about him behind his back. “Your thala has got dry. Let me pour some jhol,” maa attempts to change the topic. “Tell me what mashi was saying,” he sounds angry. “See shona, for your good only. You’ve to understand,” maa tries to console. “Tell me what she was saying,” he is looking right into maa’s eyes. Maa heaves a sigh, “There is this tantric baba Sumita knows. He is very powerful,” maa closes her eyes and touches her closed palms on her forehead to offer a pranam to the invisible Tantric baba. Maa continues, “He will give you a maduli. You’ve to tie it with a red string and wear around your wrist or neck. You’ll become normal. All problems will disappear.” Suddenly the electricity goes out. Power-cut. The lovers-on-bike song stops. The light goes out and the fan above starts slowing down to a stop. A crow outside shouts a persistent, harsh caw caw caw. He closes his eyes. The words, ‘normal’ and ‘problems’ keep echoing inside his head. And he watches in a flash the bald auto-driver, the chubby footballer, the senior dada asking him “which house” and Anjan da on his bike and the bike is going away, far away. He stands up.

‘What now? Finish eating.” Maa says. But he is oblivious to what is said to him, even as if to maa’s presence. Like an automaton he walks towards the steel almirah in one corner of the room. Maa got it as a wedding gift, he knows. He gets the keys from under the bed sheet. Maa always keeps the almirah keys there. He starts unlocking the almirah. “What do you want?” Maa has come closer to him. He opens the almirah and pulls out the first saree he finds inside. He unfurls the saree. It is a pink saree with black dots all over. He starts undressing. “What! What are you doing!” Maa fumbles with her eyes open in wonder. He stands naked with his shabby home t and pyajama lying near his feet. He starts wrapping himself with the saree. He knows very well how to wear a saree. He has noticed maa carefully many a time when she wears a saree. Sometimes he even wears one when maa goes for bath and baba is in office and there is no one else in the house. Maa sits on one corner of the bed with her hands on her bent head. Once he is done with wearing the saree he rushes to the door. Now maa gets up, “No, no, hey bhogoban, don’t go outside wearing that, no.” But before she can stop him he goes out of the door and starts running downstairs donning his pink pride. On the lane Khuku jethi and Benu pishi were out for their evening walk. They see him walking with steady strides. They look up at the balcony where maa is standing. Maa shouts addressing them, “he is acting in a play in school. Going for rehearsal in a friend’s house.” Khuku Jethi and Benu pishi look at each other. Jethi says, “he is looking just like a girl.” Pishi affirms, “he anyway behaves like a girl, always.” As he keeps walking forward all he hears is jethis words, “just like a girl.” “I’m a girl. A girl,” he thinks.

As he reaches the clubhouse and the playground, fear starts taking over. What if the boys beat him up!” Yet he does not stop. He keeps walking as if driven by a madness as intense as love or death, as life. His waist and butt alive with his usual feminine swish. The boys in the playground see him. They stop their game. They stand still, unable to grapple with the shock. Unlike what he was worrying about the boys do not utter a single word. He walks forward passing the club and the playground.

He reaches the main road and starts walking down the sidewalk. The evening has just set in. Heavy metallic sound of the moving vehicles and their horns greet him. The bright lights from the shops, the orange diffused lights from the street lamps and the neon glitter of the shop names cheer him up with rhapsodic applause. The humid evening air hisses in his ears, “Bravo girl.” The starry sky bends down to kiss on his forehead. He keeps walking forward. Bright and beautiful in the pink saree with black dots.

Suddenly a bike stops near him. “Oi,” a familiar male voice calls out. He turns back. Anjan da on his bike. Anjan da has stopped the bike by the sidewalk near him. ‘Where are you going?” Anjan da asks, “And, why have you come out like this?” a smile was playing on Anjan da’s face. He does not reply. He comes close to Anjan da and looks at him, for the first time from such close proximity. The street lamp’s orange light makes Anjan da’s sweaty, dark skin glow. He comes closer to Anjan da and says in a whisper, “Anjan da, you are handsome.” His eyes are wide and expressionless as if he is caught in a magic spell. Anjan da bluses a little, “Come, let me drop you home.”

The bike starts. She sits behind Anjan da. Anjan da’s smell touches her all over. She sits quietly. But she knows she is flying. Like the heroine in ‘ei poth Jodi na shesh hoy’. Content like maa when she brings the hot cup of tea to baba and stands close as baba drinks the tea, every night after baba is back home from work. Like them she is a girl now, a woman. She can even feel the crack down there. She is flying. ‘Romantic’, she thinks and smiles. 

