From: Meera Raja<meera_tg@yahoo.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Boyhood
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

I am ready for Hell.

Have you ever seen your parents go at it like animals? No number of screen fucks prepares you for the ultimate grossness that it is. I happened to witness it quite accidentally (I don’t think there’s any other way you would get to see something like that, by the way), after midnight, as I went to drink some water. I heard some noises I could not place, muffled moans through the plain brown wooden door that could not be closed properly. Idiot that I was, I thought they were quietly discussing me and my problem. You know, the one that can’t be said out loud without Amma filming over.

I gingerly opened the door just a few inches and it hit me, in the light of the moon filtered through the thin sari curtains. I was faced with the sight of my father’s huge body on my mother’s, crushing her, smothering her. I curbed my instinct to save her from his sheer weight. All I could see of my mother was her right eye, and a glistening tear that made its way down to the bedsheet, leaving a trail on her temple like snail snot. My mother’s lone visible eye trailed over to me and froze mid-sight. I was immobilized by it all; my feet refusing to move. After what seemed like an eternity, with my father disgustingly grunting the entire time, I softly closed the door and crept back into bed.

I can now hear muffled sobbing and pull the pillow over my head. Sheer torture, their self-flagellation. You’ll never hear a 16-year-old say this, my friends, so lap it up, but not everything is about me.

As I lay in bed, little visual details I’d rather forget flash by unbidden: my father's butt hair, for example. I have officially rotted. Rotted, but still in the fridge, like the exotic vegetables that Amma buys, but forgets to clear out until they begin growing strange-looking organisms of their own.

The month’s events take over my mind, and like a stuck CD, play themselves over and over again.

Last month was to be the last round of chemo. For two years, we had made the trip, for chemicals to enter my body so they could wreak havoc inside (the good kind of havoc, like the airstrikes Appa liked to criticize), destroying rogue cells and healthy ones. For all of you who know some child who has survived the dreaded disease, they probably had the same type that I do. It’s called ALL—Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia. Not the kind of blast a teenager should be having.

You might have heard of kids who are now “normal” twenty-somethings, their seeming normalcy failing at the most crucial litmus test: matrimonial suitability. “Well,” you might have said yourself, “I’m sure it’s alright now, but who knows? I’m sure there are other good girls for that boy.”

And you’re probably right, it’s not called a cure in these parts; it’s called remission. As if it were just a tide that has moved away from the shore. Makes you live on edge, wondering when the tide will rise—will it be slow and gradual, like the everyday tide or massive and quick, like a tsunami?

Back to my case. I guess I was prone to it, but in childhood, you never know. I had no appetite, but then, which child really does? I often fell sick, and that seemed pretty normal too. Amma would wring her hands, wonder why and ply me with all kinds of goodies. Until it was too late; well, almost.

A couple of years ago, I felt dizzy and fainted in school, as teachers stood a foot away, I was told. My then-best friend Shalu was apparently the only one who sprinkled water on my face in an attempt to wake me up while the whole of Class 8B stood around me like I was a bonfire. I underwent a battery of tests and the winner was the Big C. A lot of why-didn’t-I-think-of-it-earliers, we-have-to-be-strong-for-hims and intense chemotherapy sessions later, I achieved near-complete remission. I just go every now and then for, as Appa calls it, a tune up.

It was like my whole universe breathed a collective sigh of relief after the remission. Except me, of course. I could never bring myself to make plans beyond the next month. Relatives would come in and ask me what I wanted to be when I grew up and I’d answer, “Alive.” Teachers would speak about the all-important Class X board exams, and I would act like it had nothing to do with me.

In fact, once, Sridhar, a friend of mine, had just received the talking-down of his life from the teacher for his dismal grades. “Shit, man,” he said to me. “It’s just so fucked up. Why should I decide right now what I want to be? Why should I break my head with all these formulae? The future, man, why is everyone talking about it already? We’re only fifteen.”

I simply nodded in solidarity.

“Well, it’s alright for you. No such pressures.”

I swear that’s what he said.

It was true, though, at least in my head. I could not picture life in the future, no matter how hard I tried. Perhaps the end of chemo would embolden me to dream.

Appa and I pulled into the Cancer Hospital on D-day, the promised last round of chemo, and I bravely refused the wheelchair as we took the lift to the ridiculously-fonted board that announced itself, “Pediatric Ward”. Multicoloured Comic Sans, really? We waited, seated on the plastic chairs, with a larger-than-life Tom and Jerry decal mowing us down. I wondered what Tom was supposed to signify, the cat who unsuccessfully chased a mouse much smaller than him, the mouse reappearing the renewed vigour no matter what the cat did. It didn’t seem appropriate here. In fact, I realized, if one thought about it, it was downright depressing. Well, I told myself, it was probably the cheapest one available.

As these all-important thoughts occupied my mind, a striking girl, perhaps eight or nine, entered the room and looked at me shyly. If you don’t mind my saying so (actually I don’t care even if you do), there’s something about a girl with a shaved head that is striking. Usually, I would give her a knowing smile, maybe throw in an eye roll, indicating our incorrigible parents. It seemed like it was her first time, though. She looked nervous and shifty, as if she didn’t know what she should feel.

It was none of my business, but I wanted to tell her that it was okay to feel whatever she did. I went over to where she was seated, flanked by her parents.

I stood in front of her and wanted to talk to her.

She did not have to feel sad, or happy, or be serious, if she didn’t want to. I wanted to hold her shoulders tightly and tell her that yes, it wasn’t fair, but it was still okay. It wasn’t ideal, but it was still okay.

I wanted to tell her that we have simply morphed into mirrors. We have ceased to matter, so let’s not take ourselves so seriously. We can be as obnoxious or nice as we want; it doesn’t matter. We are the magic mirrors from Snow White, whose essential function is simply to validate: our parents’ unassailable nobility, even in the face of financial ruin; our siblings’ inherent goodness; our doctors’ tenacity; our friends’ camaraderie. We are Nirbhaya’s body, flooded Chennai, terror-attacked Paris. It doesn’t matter who we are. What matters is that, through us, people can reach in and discover themselves.

But I just stood there, looking at her and smiling, until her frown slowly widened into a smile. Her parents looked on, worried, perhaps fed on “The Fault in Our Stars” that they smuggled in and read in bed at night, trying to understand their eight-year-old Indian daughter through the prism of a sixteen-year-old American girl. As I stood on, not letting my smile fade, they smiled back. I could say none of the things I wanted to, as I simply reached for the girl’s shaven head and patted it, saying, as I heard people tell me countless times, “It’s going to be okay.”

She was called in soon enough, and I was next.

The doctor greeted me with a cheer that was usually inversely proportional to the efficacy of the treatment. Her “How are you, hero?” could, ergo, not be good news.

I was whisked in to the room, where complicated tubes and gadgets determined how long I had to live as the doctor translated it into English for Appa.

If all went well, I might not need to come here again for another year even. After they were done, I was let go. I wandered a bit and peeked into the inpatient ward, where kids lived for a few days for their intense chemo sessions, typically new diagnoses and relapses. It was a vortex of hope, pessimism, fate, religious fervor, and science, all churned together in the hope of the elusive amrit. I was surprised to note the change in décor: Princesses and Batman had given way to a large Chhota Bheem relief. I waved at the kids, who seemed much younger now, and moved on.

Appa was seated right where we were earlier, his spectacles ridiculously large for his face. He looked deflated, in spite of his considerable paunch.

On the way back, I knew he knew I’d ask the question: “So, what did the doctor say?”

“She said that the treatment was showing a lot of positive results.”

“But..?”

A pause.

“But nothing. Maybe not as positive as we had originally thought.”

“Appa,” I began.

“Yes?”

“Can you just stop the bullshit? We’ve been through this so many times. I’m done. Just tell me whatever. You know, sometimes, I think you and Amma are the sick ones.”

His mouth was agape.

 “What did the doctor say, Appa?”

“She said that we had not killed all the cells as we wanted. She noticed some cells had reappeared.”

“What does that mean?”

“It means that we have to keep trying. It’s not full remission yet. And maybe, just maybe, it has spread elsewhere.”

“What has?”

“You know…”

“No, what? The infection?”

Now you might think I’m being mean, but there’s a history to this exchange. You might not even believe it, but I had never heard my parents use the C word, at least in front of me, like it was a swear word.

Never in the two years I had it. Ever.

Maybe in the privacy of their bedroom, my parents said it over and over, until they orgasmed, “Cancer, cancer, cancer.”

So I sometimes try and get my father up the wall, but he has never relented. He liberally uses the words therapy, chemo, treatment, remission, even metastasis, but never ever the C word. As if by mere utterance, it would be encouraged to take permanent residence in my body. Maybe if I put it in as my last wish, he might just say it.

“Prakash,” he now said. “You know.”

I laughed. “Yes Appa, I just want to hear you say the word.”

He laughed nervously, his huge hairy arms seeking out my head to ruffle my hair, before he realized I didn’t have any.

So, the tide had risen again. Strangely, I felt relieved. It meant it had happened and there was no more looking over my shoulder. It was back, uninvited, and doctors had to figure out what to do with the cells, while my parents had to figure out how to set their knobs back to sad and hopeless.

That was nearly a month ago. A week of déjà vu, as I went back to school and said goodbye to friends, with unkeepable promises of updating me of every happening in class. A week of everything going back to the new normal, with me at home most of the time. A week of Appa and Amma looking forlorn and sad for their almost-16-year-old son.

I just realized they are dealing with it by having sex. Great.

I close my eyes and let myself drift away to sleep. A sleep which, at best, mimics my life and at its worst, gives me glimpses of a world where I would never belong.

My last conscious thought before I go to sleep is a revelation. My parents are at it, not out of animal instinct, but to create a replacement.

God, give me Hell. 

