From: Navaneeth Venkateswar<navaneeth.venkateswar@gmail.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: A Cafe Story
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

The air in the coffee shop had thickened. I hadn’t realized it, my head buried in the work I’d sworn to completion a week before. Stray coughs exploded like accidental crackers from the tables around me. Irked, I looked up at the counter expectantly. Why had the music stopped?

I was annoyed with the coffee shop. They could never seem to find the right balance between music that was too intrusive to my thinking and no music at all. I schooled them on suitable decibel levels each time I stopped there to work but my efforts were in vain. They continued to blast *bhangda hiphop* in the evenings and house music in the afternoons. Only one waiter, slipped in a few Beatles’ numbers in the morning hours.

I raised my hand seeking out his attention behind the counter. That’s when I noticed the heaviness in the air. Something had changed and it was only when I followed the stares that I settled on the reason.

She was seated at the table closest to the counter. The entire coffee shop watched her silently, collectively holding their breath. She seemed aware of the unsolicited attention she was drawing to herself but she continued to carefully examine the menu with the eagerness of a four year old. Her hair was disheveled, sticking out in all directions; she was balding from one side. She had beautiful, dancing eyes that smiled upon sighting each individual item on the sparse menu. A dull, green frock barely clinged onto her skeletal frame, it was too short and ripped from one side, revealing a gash on her knee that had dried over.

The coughs turned into hushed whispers that filled the silence like an ominous fog.

A disgruntled Raviji, who sneezed and burped unabashedly into the café air everyday as he worked on his laptop from noon till sundown, got up from his seat first. He stuffed his laptop into his bag and stomped to the counter bellowing ‘bill’ before he could even get there. The awestruck waiter hurriedly typed into the computer screen while Raviji fumed like a wounded tiger. When he finally managed to hand him the printed slip that emerged out of the noisy cash register, Raviji didn’t haggle for the fifteen percent discount he usually got on his café loyalty card. He quickly pulled out a wad of notes, threw them at the counter and rushed out without a word of thanks.

A couple that had spent a bulk of the previous hour fighting loudly over some drunken night in the recent past were silently forking the food in their plates. Their faces wore a pained look of discomfort as they carefully picked at the pieces of chicken gone cold until they too decided enough was enough and demanded for the bill. Another waiter rushed to their table, holding up the bill in his hands. Immediately settling what was due, they hurried out the far end of the café. The girl pulled out a cigarette from her purse and they puffed away hurriedly, glaring intermittently at the table that had forced their unceremonious exit.

The old lady and her friend, both dressed in glittery suits seemed the most dismayed by the uninvited guest. They rushed to collect their scattered shopping bags and hid them under the table, between their feet, keeping a watchful eye on the table beside the counter. The old lady and her friend took turns to cough and clear their throats repeatedly, vying for the manager’s attention. The manager disappeared behind the revolving door into the kitchen to avoid their veiled calls to action. She raised her hand, flailing them in the air desperately but the waiters remained aloof for fear of upsetting her expectations.

‘Despicable!’ She finally exploded to her friend, unable to hold it in anymore.

‘I know right! How can they allow such a thing?’

‘Anything goes on in this country!’

‘Wait till I talk to the manager!’

‘Yes! Call him right now!’

They were being purposefully loud, directing their exasperation at the waiter hiding behind the counter, eagerly waiting for his manager to reappear with instructions on how to proceed.

The manager finally emerged through the revolving doors, his face contorted in a worried expression.

‘Manager!’ her call had the urgent ring of righteousness.

The manager whispered a quick word into the waiter’s ears and bounded for their table.

The old lady now red with anger threw up her hands, ranting out a list of disappointments with the café but emphasizing on her undeniable right to exclusivity.

‘Look at her!’

‘It’s really unhygienic!’

‘I’ll have to stop coming here if you allow this…’

The manager, a tall, scrawny man with a missing spine stood haplessly next to her table. Unable to find the right responses, he smiled apologetically at the two ladies and the remaining few customers who eagerly watched the whole episode, forgetting the coffees they had impatiently ordered for.

‘Okay, that’s it! Give me your boss’ number!’

Things were getting out of hand, the manager nervously wringed his hands and shifted his weight between his feet, struggling to form words as the barrage of muttering accusations continued to batter him endlessly.

The table near the exit cleared, the screeching chairs echoing in the silence of the café. Its occupants rushed to the counter to settle their bill, then another table followed suite. The café was nearly empty now.

The manager too scared of an empty café and left with no other choice finally bowed down in defeat to the angry, old lady who was screaming hysterically. He turned uncertainly to the table in contention and walked to it in short, measured steps, trying to prolong his journey in the hopes of stumbling upon an appropriate solution.

Just then a short woman in a blue polka dot top and jeans rushed past both the manager and me to the table next to the counter.

‘*Hellooo didi! Aap kya lenge*?’

She said that with an unquestionable confidence as she settled down in the chair opposite the lady. I recognized her, she had expressed the same annoyance at the *bhangda* music playing in the evenings but I knew nothing else beyond that.

The manager stopped in his tracks and considered the new development. He unwittingly turned back to the old lady who was just as bewildered. She jumped out of her seat, threw down a thousand-rupee note and stomped out of the café, followed by her friend who religiously aped her every move as she struggled with the many bags in her hands. A mixture of fear and guilt seized his face as he watched the result of his debacle explode in front of him.

As soon as the door slammed shut, the music system started up, as if on cue. I took me a few moments to settle on the words, too distracted by the events just unfolded until I heard Lennon’s unmistakable call for revolution. My eyes darted to the waiter behind the console, his eyes smiling at me knowingly.

The two ladies at the table next to the counter shared a laugh before one turned to the manager and called for two lattes and a croissant. The manager obediently shook his head and rushed to the counter. His shoulders finally loosened and a faint smile graced his face.

I closed my eyes and prayed to Lennon’s words, an improbable victory was won on the café floor. 

