From: Ankita Srivastava<ankita.1358@gmail.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: You Can Go See Him Now
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

“You can go see him now,” signalled the sister. I snapped out of the memories of the past few weeks.

I entered the ICU. Unaware of the pain of this world. Oblivious to the needles through his extremities. I stood there as he took his last breathe.

He’s probably in a better place now.

Who? My angel.

Squeak. I pushed the window curtains apart as I heard a truck come to a halt at the driveway. It must be the Sinhas that were to move next door. I sat there sipping my coffee and finishing the half eaten biscuit from before as the clock drew 4 in the afternoon. I enjoyed the view of the unloading furniture and the perplexed mother, who was by-in-large taking care of everything. She wore a white cotton kurta. Wiping sweat pearls on her forehead from the back of her hand.

The father stood next to her. Mostly alarming the workers about the expense of each possession. But what caught my eye the most was the little boy, who was going to be the newest resident of the manicured apartment, D-25, second floor.

He was quite the extraordinary child. My eyes couldn’t help but follow the misty feet of that innocent denizen. He was so engrossed and unabated. With the moving of his own things, from top of the truck to inside the house. The bicycle followed as he rode it along. Self reliant and magnetic.

I was rather relieved to see the new neighbours. It had been ages since I had seen life around this mundane vicinage. Literally.

“Hurry up Usha, I’m late.” I directed my maid to leave so I could lock the door. I was running late today. Just in time to catch the 9 year old new neighbour trying to cross the road as I waited for my cab.

“Hey there, little fellow.” I held out my right hand expecting a gentle handshake.

“ I am not little at all,” came the cold shrug. He looked twice in two directions and crossed the road. Almost as if he was following instructions.

There it was. My first interaction with the little boy, oh pardon me, with the little man, Dhruv.

After another disappointing day at work, I was walking back home.

“Who is the child now?” screamed a whimsical juvenile voice. As he prevented me from running into an imprudent driver.

“You look to the right, then left and again right.” He directed my steps.

“And then you cross the road”.

I watched him with silent bewilderment. His words and his eccentricity were enough to evaporate the worries off my contrarily atrocious day.

“Do you want to play on the swings?” I asked Dhruv

“Will you really play with me!!?” he seemed excited

He told me how he stopped the bus so he could slap the posterior of a man peeing against the wall. And before we knew it, we were 3 hours and 2 icecream old allies already.

“I will be here at 6pm sharp”, I waved him goodbye as he strolled to his house with the usual left – right - left dictum.

On the work front, it was getting from bad to worse.

Maybe I wasn’t the competitive employee who deserves the promotions or who is always the boss’s favourite. I was content with being invisible retracting to my little recess at the corner. A synopsis not many could adhere to but honestly it didn’t impel me.

I was looking forward to my 6 pm playdate and I couldn’t care less.

“Hey big boy,”

“Let’s go there”, he signalled “Run faster”.

He seemed elated. I forgot all my adult obligatoriness. The consuming enterprise of this hour was the pace of our sprint and nothing else.

“What happened to you today?” asked me the little boy

“Nothing at all”. I rubbished his question

“Maybe I can help?”

“It’s about work,” I told him sceptically.

He looked at me with a quiescent intricacy that reckoned me to continue.

“I was working hard for something and someone else got the benefits”

“That’s it?” My problems seemed miniscule in his cosmic realm,

“What’s meant for you will come to you in time”, he continued. “ I read in school.”

“You know how my younger sister will come in this world when she has to.”

He confided in me.

“You want a little sister?” I asked

“More than anything else” he said holding his hands together as if hugging his imaginary amigo. “ I will call her Nisha”

“Mum waits for her too.” His voice was cracking, “She ties her hair really tight and high. She misses a pat on the head I think.”

“So I hug her sometimes even though I hate it. Il tell Nisha to hug her,” he exhibited.

His words resonated through me and I was caught in the profoundness of his cognition.

I left for home that day with lucid exhileration and realised how trivial my preoccupations were.

Days passed by. And I learnt a new way of life. Vivacious and effervescent. Almost, like a child.

I had witnessed it. The careless driver smash into him out of nowhere. That judicious left-right-left gesture had been defeated by a group of raging teenagers. Proved again that innocence had no eminence. They did not even look back at the damage they had done. 2 days ago at about half past 5 when I was getting back from work. Dhruv was crossing the road to his house. But this time a car raced in out of control to put his childish dreams to rest. I could see the monster car just before it hit him. I saw it and I couldn’t do anything about it. I couldn’t scream out to him. It was just by a fraction of a second that the careless driver could have missed him. But he didn’t. He lied there bleeding as they drove away. And in a matter of a few moments, the world changed upside down.

DL-3CM-1622.. Imprinted in my mind forever.

“I don’t care about them. I just want my son back.” Cried the mother.

Maybe it was insensitive to talk about the driver yet. But I was determined to have those pernicious boys punished. It wasn’t going to abrogate the turn of events. But it had to be done. To prevent recurrence.

“He is a fighter. He will make it.” I comforted the parents as I made my way out. The police van was waiting outside for interrogation.

I told them everything I knew. They had a few suspects. But no one found the murderer.

They were a group of 15-16 year olds. They had no malicious intentions. Still growing up. Were these claims justified ?

“Sir the parents should be reprimanded for giving the juvenile the car.” I argued.

The car was at 100kmph in a residential colony. If the child was to lose his life, the driver would be charged with culpable homicide and the friends for abetting the crime.

The question to be asked is. Who is to be blamed ? The 16 year olds of this society ? The parents who give in to the premature demands of vehicle possessions? The law, for not taking strict action against the cicardian crime? Or us ? For not speaking up.

Could it be prevented had authorities handled the previous crimes differently ?

Section 180 penalises anyone giving a vehicle to an unauthorised person. The decision was crucial. It is not only the greivous crime that had been committed that was a mere matter of concern but also many more that could be prevented. The power lies with the judgement. For a vehicle is a weapon in the wrong hands.

“Let this matter go to dust,” I got a strange call a week after I had filed the complain.

“Excuse me!?” I retaliated.

“You will never find the drivers of that car. If you want your safety, stop trying”

I wasn’t going to give in to these threats.

We need to take strict action. Let no one take law for granted. Tossing and turning the whole night, that’s all I could think of.

The next morning. You know what I did? I withdrew my case. It took me one neighbour, one threat, one night - to know who I was. A loser. It was my prerogative to take action. And I didn’t. I could speak about it. Lose sleep about it. Go to candle march. But when it was time to stand up, I didn’t.

So here is my story. Let us not keep quiet anymore. Let us not fear anymore. It is a neighbour’s child today, tomorrow it could be mine. Let’s not let another life lose meaning. Another family lose a Dhruv.

For when it was time for action, I stepped back.

So I share my story. To be the change I want to see.

It haunts me. Everyday.

May his soul rest in peace. 

