From: Abha Iyengar<abhaiyengar@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: The Face Mask
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

 ‘A sudden burst, that’s how it has to happen, but it must.’

Manhar’s thoughts were slow, pondering, not at all in keeping with the quick splat, splat of the cream on his face by Javed of ‘ColourbyUs’, the beauty parlour for men in one of the bylanes of Madhu Vihar, a shopping area in East Delhi.

You could easily miss this parlour on the first floor, if you were not on the look-out for it. Manhar had chanced upon it when he accompanied a friend saree shopping for his wife for Karvachauth. As he watched his friend bargain at the saree store to bring the price of the bright pink chiffon with gota work further down, he glanced up out of boredom and spotted the salon. He continued to watch his friend, keeping a straight face. He did not break into the wry smile he was known for; one that said the whole world was some kind of a joke.

He had of course bought a saree for his wife Kavita, from Roop Sarees in South Extension. Karvachauth was more an indulgence for Kavita than anything that she did for him, the fasting more of a farce, for did they see eye to eye at all? Yet, she carried on the pretense of fasting for him, his health and wellbeing, things quite far from her mind on most days. Kavita displayed a level of indifference towards him, and he could hold himself responsible for this up to a point, for he had not given her a child in all these ten years of married life. Their life in bed was dismal, and she felt betrayed.

Manhar had often told Kavita, when she broke out into a spate of complaints and accusations, that she had too many expectations. If he did not perform in bed, he did try to fulfill all the other requirements as a husband, earning to provide for her as best he could.

He had noticed her slow withdrawal over time, and had felt an innate sense of relief at this. If she had wondered why he did not protest, she kept that thought to herself. He had seen the lines deepen around her mouth. For the last five years, as if on cue, he had begun to draw women with dead eyes and stern mouths, their backs straight and unyielding, their breasts heavy, leaking some liquid like tears, if breasts could weep. People had snapped them up, just like they had snapped his earlier drawings of young men with anxious eyes and heavy lips, their bodies taut with desire. Some of these men had kohl’d eyes. People wondered about this, often questioning Manhar. Manhar gave them a wry smile, one he was now famous for, and said, “ Give me some artistic licence, Sir!” Or madam, if it was a lady who asked, and there were many.

They would look at him, Manhar Doshi, with his ram-rod straight back and pencil moustache, his white shirt, pressed grey flannel pants and polished Oxfords, and wonder. He looked more an army man than an artist. There was no long hair touching his shoulders, no cigarette dangling on his lips. He did not wear an orange or mustard khadi kurta with white pyjamas stained with colour or charcoal dust. He did not wear jewellery, there was no necklace at his throat nor beads on his wrist. His voice was clipped and forthright. It was only when he laughed, which was seldom, could one see certain elements that were not noticeable in the usually stiff way he carried himself. His eyes would crinkle then, and become merry for a while. But there was no laughter in his paintings. They portrayed sorrow, and people loved to see this on the faces of the men and the boys, the women and girls.

Where did that internal anguish come from? All he had for answer was his signature wry smile. Sometimes he would say, “At 40, I have seen enough.” He did not give interviews, and his shows were low-key affairs, but he had carved a niche audience for his work.

*

“Sir, please turn over, I will massage your shoulders and back,” said Javed. Manhar glanced at the young boy, who would be 25 years old at the most. He had fine features and clear, youthful skin. He was thin, with sticky legs encased in blue jeans. Manhar turned over. The hands on his back felt like heaven. As they moved over his shoulders and lower back, Manhar felt the tight knots in his body loosen. Javed was good; this was the second time he was getting him to do a facial. Manicure and pedicure was next in line.

Kavita had noticed how he had become more ‘groomed’ recently, yet she had not enquired about it. He had not missed her raised eyebrows, but had not put forth any explanation. Some tacit understanding existed between them now, of letting each other live his and her life as each deemed fit. The only thing that bound them was the rituals and expectations of society, which Kavita followed to the hilt. If she could have managed to produce a child without him, she would have done that too, but perhaps she did not want that so much, Manhar mused. He had once suggested to her that they adopt a child, but she had ignored the suggestion. He had let it go at that, even though she did hold this lack of kids like a Damocles sword over his head.

“Aa-aa-h,” he let an involuntary gasp of pain and pleasure escape his lips as Javed’s hands kneaded his lower back, then moved up to his shoulders and down his upper arms. “Sir, you have very firm arms,” said Javed, grinning shyly at him. Manhar caught the suggestion of something in Javed’s eyes.

“Yes,” Manhar’s voice was gruff, discouraging further talk.

Javed became quiet, his hands slowed down, and his attention turned more to the finishing the job.

The face pack was dabbed on. While Manhar waited for it to dry and tighten on his face, his thoughts went to his latest collection, ready to be showcased at Habitat the day after. He was preparing for just this. Earlier in the week he had had his hair coloured and streaked, and bought the clothes he intended to wear. Kavita had not commented on his hair, and that surprised him.

He had quipped then, “Well, I just want to look as modern and smart as you do.”

“You shouldn’t even try,” she said, and shut him up. “Wonder where you go…really!”

“I go to a small little place in East Delhi because I want to do this without making a song and dance about it…” he had almost said, then bit his tongue and turned away.

The mocking face of his 35 years old wife flashed before his eyes and his face downturned for a split second. Javed arrived and silently removed the face pack. Manhar retained the feel of Javed’s fingers on his face and back, and a sigh almost escaped his lips, but he held it back and walked out to use the washroom.

As Manhar splashed the water on his face and then wiped it dry with tissues, he looked at himself. The face of the hungry artist, he thought. Even now the hungry artist, despite all the success.

*

Manhar stood in front of his paintings. A crowd had gathered around, and there had been a collective gasp at the sight of his work. This work was in colour, and it had men dressed as women, women dressed as men, women making love to women who dressed like men, men embracing men who appeared as women, naked boys and girls playing with each other. There was joy on the faces, delight in their bodies, and their eyes sparkled. There was a riot of colour on the canvas.

A lady, pink diamonds sparkling on her throat, walked up to Manhar. “What are you saying here?”

“It is self-explanatory, Manisha,” he said.

She noticed his streaked hair, his polished nails, his half-open shirt and blue jeans. Then she came and stood next to him. ‘You have my full support,” she said. “Oh, how I love this. Rebellion, huh?”

Manhar gave her a small smile. “Not really. Just speaking my mind.”

“How daring! The paintings show…your protest.”

“If you think so, Manisha,” was all he said.

He watched the crowd, how it gathered around, astounded. He had yet another card to play, but he was waiting for Kavita to arrive. Kavita usually made a grand entrance at his exhibitions, trying to take the attention away from his work, before finally coming to stand by his side.

As usual, when she walked in, dressed in a sleeveless, backless choli, her sari wrapped tight around her slim figure, all attention turned to her. Her pretty face shone in the light, but Manhar thought that if she smiled even a bit, her face would crack. As she glided up to him, he removed the sheer red saree he had draped on the back of his chair. In a quick movement, he tied it around his waist. He placed a blue mask on his face, and adopted a pose.

“Ardhnareshwar, I am he,” said Manhar.

All attention swiveled from her to him. Kavita did a huge intake of breath and her face paled. She lost a step, then sat down on the nearest chair.

There was shocked silence, and then the place filled with the sound of thunderous claps. Those who did not want to understand his stance could now find a reason in religion and God. Manhar was portraying Shiva, and him as half-man, half-woman, anyone could understand.

Finally, Manhar removed his mask, but he kept the red saree on.

*

Kavita would divorce him, and he would accept it. He had waited long enough to do this, and now the time had come. In a colour burst, in the only way he knew how, he was declaring to the world where the anguish of his paintings came from; from the feelings and thoughts he had suppressed for so long, that he was a man and he loved and desired men. He had played the part that society had asked him to for a long time, but now he wouldn’t do it any more.

At the art exhibition, he was making a declaration many would mistake as a statement to go with his paintings. But Kavita would know, and some others would know, and the world would finally understand how difficult it was for him to come out. He did not like the stiff back he held so straight or the gruffness of his voice, or the Oxford shoes. He wanted to dress like a woman and behave like one. He wanted to strike up a conversation with young men like Javed, encourage their attention, and not think twice. 

