From: Vandana Jena<vandana.jena@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: The Ideologue
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Things have gone terribly wrong, I know. The acrid smell of smoke is all around me. A blanket of smog has enveloped us. I can smell petrol. It is a smell I love, but not when it is splashed on human bodies or spilt on the ground. How did it happen? Who is responsible?

Was it just two days ago that I was standing in the cricket ground in Delhi University, making an impassioned plea against the proposed reservations? The University Ground was packed with students. I could see television cameras scattered around the field. Everyone loves a tamasha.“Down with Reservations,” I said, my voice hoarse from shouting, “Down with Mediocracy, Up with Meritocracy.” The slogan sounded nice. I liked the cadence of the words. They had a rhythm to it. “Down with Reservations,” chanted the others. My sentiments resonated with the crowd, which stood the sweltering sun, ready to commit itself to a cause.

“Twenty three years ago,” I began, my voice passionate, “there was a country-wide agitation against reservations.” There was silence as the students looked avidly at me. “Rajiv Goswami, and other students agitated against the Mandal Commission Report and sacrificed their lives for it.”

“The time has come to agitate once again, to sacrifice if we need to, as they had done, to make the Government see reason. First there were reservations for SCs and STs, then for the OBCs, now separate reservations for women have been proposed, by approaching the Supreme Court for enhancing the ceiling for reservations to 70%. What about the general category males? What is our crime? Are we children of a lesser god? Are the doors to the prestigious civil services, medical colleges and engineering colleges closed to us forever?

As I spoke about the proposed stratification of the society on gender lines, which would have repercussions both at home and at the workplace, my voice was strident, my demeanour uncompromising and every person hearing me knew that I meant business. I am not a misogynist. I am not male chauvinist either. I respect women. I come from a family of strong women. I know they can compete with men and excel in all the fields like humanities, medicine and engineering. Women have claimed equality with men. By providing them reservations, the government will do them a disservice. People will lose respect for them, thinking they came through the quota system. I am not the only one who thinks that. Many women agree with me. That is why there were a sizeable number of girls in the University grounds.

My voice began to rise, and I realised that I was emotionally distraught. But I knew I had stirred passions, churned emotions and whipped up enthusiasm among the crowd of students which had initially been listless. I sat down afterwards, feeling a bit dizzy and emotionally drained. The media had lapped up every word of what I had said.

But this was no time for self praise. It was time to turn my talk into action. The next morning I would begin my fast. I had suggested a hunger strike. Somewhere the plans had changed to an indefinite fast, somewhat like Anna Hazare’s, whose fast at Jantar Mantar was fresh in the minds of people. Amit’s was the voice of caution which had said, “Don’t be hasty in suggesting this Vineet, such decisions take time.” Was it he, who had said exasperatedly, when I had remained adamant about going on a hunger strike, “You are no Gandhiji who sits on a fast unto death and brings the government to its knees, or even a Anna Hazare whose fast calls for mediation.” “You are just a mediocre student who has pretensions of being a youth leader,” Amit did no speak these words aloud, but I could see the derision on his face.

“Besides you will not be able to keep a fast for many days, you love your chicken tikka and beer too much,” he added.

My idea of a mass hunger strike was transformed into a one man’s indefinite fast because people remembered Anna Hazare’s fast and what followed. I did not object, I thought maybe this indefinite fast would provide me a national stature. From being a mere Student Union President I would be catapulted into national politics.

Protest is in my blood, I admit. My Nani too languished in jail for six months under the Preventive Detention Act. But those were heady days, she says nostalgically. She talks of Gandhiji and Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose in the same breath. One who gave a clarion call for`Quit India’ and the other who raised raised the Indian National Army to oust the British from India. Netaji’s slogan, ”Give me blood, and I shall give you freedom,” scribbled in her autograph book is still cherished by her. There is a catch in her voice when she speaks of them, the icons from her past, who have left such an indelible impression on her mind.

My Ma too was in jail between 1975 and 1977, during the turbulent years of the Emergency. Was she moved by idealism or merely the romanticism of protest? Was she an ardent advocate of the freedom and liberty which were curbed during the Emergency or was she a blind follower of the student leaders of that time? Ma is tight-lipped about her time in prison. For her it was a nightmare she would prefer to forget.

“This is a rehearsal for the future,” Amit’s voice intruded into my thoughts. I looked at him suspiciously. Did he guess that I had political ambitions of being the Chief Minister of Delhi one day? Or a Union Minister? But that was too far away into the future. In politics and in life, one must live one day at a time.

The first two days of the fast went well enough. I felt the hunger pangs but the adulation of the crowds gave me a new high. The nimbu pani I drank at night quenched my thirst, though it offered me little sustenance. The third day I had a dizzy spell. The physician who attended to me diagnosed low blood sugar and dehydration. That evening he ordered me to give up my indefinite fast. I had to do something drastic. It is then that I uttered those fateful words, “If the government does not accede to our demands I shall self-immolate myself.” Why did I say them? I do not know. Did I have a death wish? And why did I not notice the news reporter lurking in our midst?

Today videos can be made on the smartphone. Why did the Channel pick it up and flash it at regular intervals? Wasn't there any national news worth airing? But the deed was done. I was trapped by my own words. To back down would have been cowardly. I would lose face among the student community. A student leader must stand tall.

I could see Aarti looking worriedly at me. Aarti hates violence. She knew that the threat to self-immolate myself could lead to large scale violence. I caught the yearning look Amit gave Aarti. “This is what is called`dog-like’ devotion,” I thought mirthlessly. I should have felt sorry for Amit. Once he and Aarti were a couple, until I snatched her away from him. But I was not sorry. Everything is fair in love and war, I said to myself. Only I wasn’t sure if it was love. Or if I would tire of her, as I had of the others before her.

The Government must defer bringing in the legislation, I prayed, now that the media was playing up my threat of self-immolation. But I knew that it was merely wishful thinking on my part. The General Elections were scarcely a year away. The Government would bring the legislation immediately to win over half the electorate.

For me it was a `do or die’ situation. I had no choice. But I found a way out. That evening I had my plan ready. I instructed Amit, “Just fill two balloons with kerosene. I will place them in the armpits of my kurta. At the right moment I will prick the balloons and the kerosene will spill down my kurta. No one will know. Then I will then drop my lighted cigarette on my pyjamas. They will catch fire. Just keep buckets of water ready to douse the flames before I am seriously hurt.”

I reached the University grounds early the next morning. A number of policemen had been deployed there. The government was expecting me to carry out my threat. I continued with my fast before the anxious crowd. The police were on the look out for my supporters with cans of kerosene. Suddenly I got up, ostensibly to stretch my limbs. Then I picked up a pen, pricked the two balloons near my armpits, and before police could realise what was happening I lit a cigarette and touched my pyjamas. My pyjamas went up in flames. I could smell petrol. The flames leapt high. I smelt the acrid smell of burning flesh. My body was on fire.

“Water. Water,” I shouted. This was no time for heroics. I did not wish to die like this. I saw a bucket of water nearby. But as Amit hurried towards me, his leg hit against the bucket and the water splashed on the ground. Amit did the next best thing. He rolled me on the floor to douse the flames.

Something has gone wrong, very wrong. Amit’s face is white. He calls a friend for help. They roll me on the floor repeatedly. I can see the blisters on Amit’s hands. His hands will hurt like hell for months As for me, I have become a human torch. “Call the ambulance,” I gasp. The ambulance arrives quickly.

Safdarjung Hospital Burns Unit. The words are stamped in my mind. My flesh hurts. I still feel I am on fire. I think of those who died during the in Mandal Agitation in 1990. What inspired them? I wonder.

I have no such claim to martyrdom. I am a victim of a plan gone awry. I look at my burnt hands and misshapen fingers. Will I be able to play the guitar? I wonder. More important, will I live? Agitations recede into the background. Do I really care if there is 20% reservation for women? Today I would happily advocate reservations for women if only I could put the clock back. Why did I not listen to Amit, when there was still time?

I see Amit outside the room talking to the doctor. I hear the doctor say, ”70% burns, most of them in the upper torso. There is a real danger of septicaemia. The chances of survival seem bleak.” He is not talking to me. For him I do not exist. I am just a cadaver. Only my date of departure from this world is not certain. He has given up on me. As has everyone else.

Amit enters the room, wearing a face mask, taking precautions that he does not infect me. Then I see a fleeting smile on his face. It cannot be. I must be imagining it. Amit kicking the bucket of water. which would have reduced the intensity of the burns. Amit rolling me on the floor, in the time old tradition, making the burns go much deeper. The petrol in the balloons instead of kerosene. Did he do it deliberately? My conviction grows. In the midst of my pain and discomfort I can only mouth one word. “Why?” Amit looks at me intently. He has no difficulty in understanding what I mean. In a flash I understand why he did it. Aarti. “All’s fair in love and war,” he says. “There are many ways of protesting, of showing dissent,” he adds, “You chose yours. I chose mine.” 

