From: Yashaswini Devanathan<yashaswinidevanathan@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: I Live To Be Me
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Zyvana like any other teen-ager agreed to disagree with her parents. Just wanted to enjoy life and live upto the quote “I want to lead a life from which I don’t need a break from.” This was her policy of life. She was never a class topper but performed quite well. She loved to sing, dance, write and whatnot. Her family, knowing her creativity, suggested a career of business, as she was a headstrong girl. But she had other plans for life.

She wanted to see the world, smell it, taste it, and hear from it. She wanted and sought adventure from her life. She never wanted to live a normal girl’s life, just getting married and having babies. But society never appreciated her philosophy. Only a very few people understood her and appreciated her philosophy of life. Zyvana nurtured an ambition of working as a camera-woman in a travel show, travel the world, and earning money and respect in the job. She was all set to take up videography and photography training.

She was allowed to take up the class as her hobby but not as a career option. There was a big row in her house. She then chose to be quiet. She pursued it like a hobby but with a passion. For her parents, she took up a degree in business studies, and pursued a P.G. She performed well in her courses too. She applied to a travel channel as well.

Finishing her course, she got placed in a good company, but her actual career never turned up. She took up the job for some income, but was depressed as she didn’t get a reply from the travel show channel. She couldn’t share her agony with anyone either. After about 8 to 9 months, a courier from a grand travel channel cheered up her spirits. It was a call for training following an aptitude test. She took up the test with excitement and nervousness. She took out her DSLR which had been locked up since she joined her job. She kissed it and said “Today is the day, I’ll make you my mate and we’ll be together all our lives.”

She reached the test centre an hour before and registered herself for the test. Zyvana had a lot of time in her hand, went around the training rooms. She passionately watched the training sessions in progress, observed new techniques being taught, from a distance.

Now it was time for her real test. The candidates had to click nature photos and pass them to the examiners. She clicked many wonderful and huesome photos all that could catch her attention. Alongside the trainers and the examiners went through all the photographs sent to them, needless to say that they were impressed with Zyvana’s pictures.

She performed well in videography test too by catching vibrant scenes in her frames. Her passion for the art was revealed through her work. She was contended with herself as the tasks unfolded.

In about two weeks time the selection list was announced. But the fourteen days seemed endless for her, making her feel the fourteen days were fourteen years. The day of results dawned with anticipation and anxiety. She had almost topped the list of selection, sharing her position with Yati another girl of the same age. When they met, they shook hands but with ego on their parts. Few hours later after long chats they both realised they shared many things in common, but for the fact that Yati was an engineering graduate, another “victim” of conventional career ideas of her family.

They both shared interests in reading, dance, mythology, special interests in photography and above all they shared the name of Goddess Durga.

They exchanged their contact numbers and resolved to convince their respective families regarding their chosen career option which was definitely away from the traditional ones. As expected the families did not approve of their choice and they both had very tough time convincing them.

After a lot of arguments, their families agreed reluctantly to allow them to pursue their dreams. The families were planning their moves to tackle the accusations of raising disobedient, dissident daughters. Their respective extended families did taunt them that the girls were not on the right track. But Zyvana and Yati ignored them all and stood firm in their decisions.

Shortly afterwards they both were recruited to video shoot an exotic location abroad by the channel that hosts travel shows. There was no looking back for them as they travelled to serene places, tough terrains and sometimes historic places too. The fact that they both got recruited into the same team and same genre was a bonus for them.

Zyvana and Yati live their dreams, lead a contended and happy life than any of their batch-mates. With their hardwork and sincerity combined with passion they have climbed up the ladder of success trying to reach its peak.

Today they are among the few daring girls who are successful by questioning the conventional ideas of education and career without compromising the ethical and moral values of the society.

“Being dissidents has paid off rich dividends in their lives.” 

