From: Manik Sharma<manik212@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Legacy
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

High in the tresses that had earned the roof its reputation for narrative design, the hostility of a rock dove’s flight, cutting, suddenly across a beam of sunlight that had shot along the edge, caught Prasad’s attention. A previously disregarded vacuum now occupied by light and dust, enough to throw him out of his daydream. At his desk, mining his memory for the many conversations he had over the years across the benches and had disliked, he was trying to build within his mind, a sensory sequence of real events that would justify the enormous step he was about to take. The idea to consult had occurred and rejected by his conscience. Not in the least with his closest friends, Himanshu and Mohit , whom he preferred to imagine in youthfulness indebted to a kind of principle they once agreed was necessary for life. They were now, or at least they seemed, rejects of a memory fast decomposing under the idea they, once, equivocally shared. Other than to make way for an identity removed from theirs, Prasad simply wanted to break free, the least from a history he couldn’t erase himself from. At the bench, foremost in the aisle that led to a dias covered in confetti and flowers, stinking and shining from the president’s visit two days ago, he sat, his body warm, sweating, cringing from a desperation he had for months kept behind his lip. But there had to be a method to it, maybe even a gesture, the symbolism of which would go beyond the lapse of discipline that was considered as futile as human intrigue’s scalpel, chiselling some shine off of the decoration of institutions like this. It need not be overtly vulgar or elaborate, but just the right kind of sizzle. It had to be, Prasad thought to himself, almost feeling defeated in doing so, the right kind politic as well.

Twelve years of blood and sweat had gotten Prasad into the big-boy room, but avuncular mentors were a thing of the past, and on the journey in, most of his soft feathers he had had to shed for a transformation his exuberance paid the price for. Things were decidedly different from the outside, where you could pretty much jab someone’s conscience, and the worst that you could expect was an open, excited retaliation taking you towards an exhausted conclusion. Inside, the only exhaustion that people suffered from was holding onto their tongues. And when that exhaustion bowled over, it made people throw chappals at the dias, shout standing on the benches, or on the one occasion threaten to abandon all clothing. So there had to be method to it, or getting kicked out, barred, and expelled from both office and home would mean nothing. Prasad, though, couldn’t think of anything that had a philosophical edge to it and was just as symbolic. Frustrated, he stared at his feet, withdrew his handkerchief and started rolling it under the desk.

Babu ji sat in front of the television, having ascertained the dullest moment of day as being his escape from the real world. He would randomly switch between news channels, until he arrived on one that was saying something to the tune of what he thought was right. Apart from a bottle of rum, a packet of peanuts, sliced watermelon, and spliced lemons sat by the back leg of the chair he slunk up and down all day, the sunlight visiting and leaving his area of relevance like an artisanal client. Every now and then he would shift to take account of his bahu’s activities, and those of his granddaughter. The two servants were always around to assist marginalising the handicap he sometimes felt when he tried to remember his long dead wife.

In the evening, when his intake of rum would pace itself to the tone of the news, he would talk to his son about the party’s status, a legacy he had passed on to his elder son, despite the notable accomplishments of the younger, who had now been living away from home, in Germany, for seven years. The party mattered most, and it was worth a hundred sons if that is what it was going to take. His younger son, though, had found sanctuary, and perhaps even a new country, which was unpardonable. The waywardness had never seemed coming, and it was more of a bargain, Babu ji had thought at that time, for someone to learn the alien, or the foreign, to further the interest of the party and the family. But inexplicably, things veered off-scheme. In his heart of hearts Babu ji had decided to lay him off of the family inheritance, of which, again, the party came first because there was no point imposing the franchise on someone who refused to step up to the mark of his responsibilities. No one had ever been able to refuse him anything, not in the least bit the pride that he swore by. Babu ji, therefore, had decided to resist the map, his ink would never allow the creation of. He, now had just the one son, and he should be the first one to know that, he thought.

 Neha sat in the attic, looking over the back gate of the mansion from where she would see the two cars - one an ambassador and the other a gypsy – noisily, rattling along a muddy causeway that split cornfields into equal looking rectangles on each side. Pretence was her refuge, and she hid with its hood pulled over, in the attic away from her scornful father-in-law. She really didn’t have to do anything, except perhaps help her daughter with her homework. Chores were taken care of by the two servants the party’s committee had left especially for the family. The misery the old man lived out of was like the undisguised truth of the house but his tendency to relay that to others, her in particular, had gone unacknowledged in all of the decade that she had now lived with the family. She had met Prasad in college and had instantly fallen in love; his innocence and unremarkable countenance being the things she had felt most comfortable around, during a time when everything was raging with a consciousness of sorts.

The relationship had bloomed, and though they had consummated it before marriage, Prasad had made a point of keeping it secret. They could never tell anyone. His father, though unwilling at first, had eventually given in once the son had pledged his life to the party. The fact that Neha belonged to a wealthy upper-caste family had further soothed the blow. The honeymoon had been on an island with a startling seaside on the banks of which she had last swallowed her last drop of alcohol; that and when she had last met her friends from college, when she had accidently kissed Prashant, once, her greatest admirer. She taught herself, more than anyone else, that love was an idea you had to consistently redraw to remain faithful to, because memory was slave to discontentment. Her daughter, she could not confide in, because she was only eight years old, and her husband, though a good listener, had only given face to the argument once suggested by her friends before the marriage that innocence could only soften the shrillness of the bedroom, outside of which, a bit of steel and bearings to grate that steel with was a must.

She grabbed a few wet clothes off of the clothesline and started shifting things that did not need shifting to make time in case anybody noticed. Things might change today, she thought as Prasad had promised her they would. Or else she would have to grab life by the neck and reclaim what she thought was hers – freedom.

Anu descended the steps of the academy, a man hesitatingly shuffling beside her. He was learning on the job. Having escorted men of importance, a little girl was new. Her grandfather’s opinion that a woman should be the soul of the house and in some way introduce that transcendental, feminine quality to the household, had sent her to her first vocal classes. The town had a history of producing singers and dancers, most of them women, who would later adorn the heritage of some family or the other – most of them royal; twenty-one, being the age by which that graduation had to be completed, matted with the conspiring brightness of stars that had left their identities to rot at the edge, resigned to the brightness of day.

Near the academy she saw little girls, her age, with their dupattas tied near the waist, running around, skipping ropes and dust in equal measure, limits she had come to learn she couldn’t cross, except, behind the gates of her house, where everyone seemed to be a wall she couldn’t carelessly bounce against. Grandpa seldom talked to her, the reason for which she was always on the lookout for. Often she had felt he did not like her being around, except for the moments when she’d tell him how she was doing at her classes, the ones in school or the academy. Her closest friend was the strange man who accompanied her everywhere, and then took to the chores at home upon their return. She had, at multiple times, felt like staying back at school because it was the one place where she wasn’t looked at uniquely, or given special attention. She wanted to be a nobody, a nothing mess that children around her found palpable joy in. Her parents seemed to her statuesque, alive only in the moments when she needed to be told what her business wasn’t. All of that had to end. If only, she could help someone understand.

 Rohan sat by the phone, his boyfriend in the shower where they had been making love a few minutes ago. They had been dating for seven months now. Everything had been surprisingly, easy. He wanted nothing to do with the family, and wanted not to return and perhaps, back in India, his family, especially his father, knew that. Because who would understand? It wasn’t that reading Marx or Kant had changed him but only helped him accept that he couldn’t. His escape having come at a time when learning, was momentarily, seen as an appendage to the incredulity, history had shown to his idea of the future: a history worth remembering could only be created by a present worth living. Something his brother had found in Neha; something he had now grazed the wrong periphery of on so many occasions, it seemed almost worthwhile to remain lost in its undrawn landscape. A land from where inheritance, and legacies were drawn short, almost cut at the outset. Nobody would understand, the least his father. But he had to tell them to stop waiting, or give up. Today he would.

Three months later, however, he would return.

Prasad exchanged glances with Neha who stood clothes in hand, at the bottom of the stairwell. He shook his head upon which she registered a kind of disappointment. In the verandah where Babu ji was seated, feet half hanging in the sun, Prasad went and sat on the settee next to him.

“Ticket mil gya pitajee”, he said. Babu ji looked at him, a hint of teardrop forming in his left eye, or perhaps of the drunken stupor he was now the framed reference of in political circles. A kind of pride began to swell inside him. But he said nothing. Not a word. Prasad uncaringly rose, and went to the kitchen where he knew his wife would be waiting.

“I couldn’t,” he said and walked away. Her shoulder, now wet, had started to ache under the weight of the clothes she had in her dejection forgotten to put away. She sighed, picked up a pan in the kitchen and put some water on the stove for some cinnamon tea.

The phone rang and Prasad, on his way up, in a decidedly indifferent tone told his brother about what had happened, leaving the receiver on the table for anyone who cared to explain to his him, his desperation for a freedom he now felt eternally unattainable. Upstairs, inside the washroom he looked into the mirror, the rolled handkerchief in hand, tied at both ends to his chappals which he then put around his neck and smiled a surly, sad smile.

Outside, his daughter waited, with the chloroform of schedule having lifted over her head, with a kind of impetus that she immediately lost on seeing what her dad had around his neck.

In the lawn, in the pall of the dying sun, with some kheni in their palms the two servants discussed how the lesser son would one day return to fortify Babu ji’s legacy. The one, who had heard his granddaughter sing, knew that that could change, if anyone wanted it to, but did not say it. 

