From: Usha Rajagopalan<usha.rajagopalan@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Tipping Point
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Vani talked loudly to herself all the time except when her husband or son were home. Sometimes even then, if she thought they were too busy to hear her. As she did just then. She glared at the newspaper which hid her husband and said fiercely, though in a low voice, ‘Look at him! Just look at him.’

Sitting across her at the dining table, Venkat did not respond. After 27 years of togetherness, he had selective hearing.

Aditya came out of his room, running a hand through damp hair. Using a comb was not the done thing among boys his age.

‘I was about to call you,’ she addressed her son. ‘Your coffee has gone cold. I’ll make another.’

‘No time, Mom,’ he replied. ‘For your sake I’ll take a bite.’ He opened the hot case and slammed it shut. ‘Idli again? I’ll eat outside.’

‘No, you won’t!’ Venkat threw the newspaper down. ‘You’ll eat what your mother has made. ’

‘But Dad, I’ll be late to college. There! Hear the honking? My friends are waiting downstairs.’ He gave a cheeky grin.

‘Now!’ Venkat snapped while Aditya rolled his eyes upwards with a ‘Daaad!’

Vani got up quietly and went to the kitchen. She knew that the verbal assaults between father and son would subside as quickly as it began. They would realize that they needed to be elsewhere and leave home abruptly. On some days Aditya’s friends would have left and Venkat would drop him off at college, thrusting a hundred rupee note or two into his son’s hand. This made her simmer.

With her back against the kitchen ledge, Vani spewed her anger. ‘Money is what matters these days. I’d have been earning too if Venkat’s parents hadn’t insisted that I stay at home. Why blame them though? I didn’t realize the worth of my own potential. If I didn’t too well academically it was only because I was busy taking part in competitions and organizing events. Oh, but I had so much fun getting volunteers, inviting the chief guest, seeking press coverage, raising money and more.’ She sighed. ‘Instead of developing my strengths, I let others dictate the path of my life. Where did it lead me? Into the kitchen. Dependent on my husband for everything.’

‘Mom, you can come out now,’ Aditya shouted. ‘I ate the idlis but please don’t make them for another year.’

Venkat opened the kitchen door and popped his head in. ‘I’ll drop him off. One Sheela called to say that she’d come over at 11 a.m. Who’s this Sheela?’

‘Someone I met the other day. She’s in a ladies group and wants me to join them. You should have called me. I’d have fobbed her off with some excuse.’

‘Well, you’re the one complaining about having nothing to do and no one to talk to the whole day. Have a bull session with your Sheela and tell us all the gossip in the evening.’

‘As if he’ll listen to me,’ Vani snorted. She opened the kitchen tap and splashed water on her face, letting it fall on the vessels waiting to be washed.

‘How do I tackle Sheela? Maybe Neha can give me some ideas.’ She glanced at the clock. ‘About 10 p.m. for her. I’ll Skype her.’

Neha came online promptly. ‘What’s up, Amma?’

‘What are you doing?’

‘’nother assignment. They’re endless and so much work.’

‘You like it though, don’t you?’ Vani asked, peering closely at the screen. ‘You don’t look tired or overworked.’

‘That’s coz I love it, Ma! I love my studies, my college, friends and above all, the freedom to be what I want, do what I want. I love awesome America!’

A cold hand clutched Vani’s heart and squeezed it slowly.

‘Don’t go too ga ga about the U.S.,’ she said sharply. ‘Remember you’ve to come back home next June.’

Neha adjusted the monitor screen as if to see her mother better. ‘Didn’t Appa tell you that I plan to do my PhD here? Appa’s such a darling. He said, Go ahead. Don’t bother about the money. He didn’t tell you? Must have been too busy. Poor chap.’

‘I’m the one you should feel sorry for. Nobody tells me anything. I might as well not be here.’

‘Mom, don’t start now. You have the whole day to yourself but I’ve tons of work to do before I crash for the night. Tell you what, I’ll call you on Sunday and we’ll talk as much as you want but...’

Vani closed the laptop and got up. Her mobile rang. She switched it off. The landline buzzed. She heard Neha say, ‘Amma..’ and disconnected the call.

‘My own family doesn’t have time for me. All right then. I’ll take care of myself. Thank you.’

Just then, as if punctuating her remark, the door bell rang. She looked through the peep hole, swore softly and opened the door.

‘Hi, Sheela. I was expecting you. Please come in,’ she said, leading the way to the drawing room.

‘I happened to be in the neighbourhood and thought I’d drop in.’ Sheela paused. ‘You didn’t seem convinced about our ladies group. It’s not all cards and chitchat, you know. We get together and do some serious work as well if we think it’s a worthy cause.’

Vani gave an tight lipped smile.

‘With more members, we’ll be able to do a great deal. This is why I’ve come. To ask you to join us. If after all the good work we do, we enjoy ourselves with an occasional movie, lunch or high tea, what’s wrong? And remember, there’s no membership fee.’

Tea! ‘Would you like to have some tea?’ asked Vani.

Her guest demurred. ‘I have to meet at least two other ladies before....’

‘I’ll be back in a jiffy. Make yourself comfortable.’

*** Sheela looked at the mounted paintings and framed photographs hanging on the bright green and yellow walls. A cataract in acrylic tumbled merrily over boulders shooting a shower of fine spray everywhere. Another fell from such a height that one would expect turbulence at the base. Instead, the water sank into a quiet vortex. The photographs were of birds - cormorants, herons, a pair of Mandarin ducks with the female insignificant beside its mate in showy breeding plumage. A Darter’s slender neck stretched like a snake out of the water.

‘Wow! Someone loves Nature. You?’ Sheela asked as soon as Vani returned with tea and biscuits.

Oh, this woman is not so bad after all!

‘My husband is the artist. He wants to paint to his heart’s content after retirement. If he stays indoors day after day, he’ll drive me nuts, ’ she said with a laugh. ‘Our daughter has taken these photographs. He loves water and she’s crazy about birds. This is why we bought this flat ....’ Vani stretched a hand dramatically towards the balcony.

From the ninth floor of Vani’s apartment, Sheela got a good view of a typical cityscape. Dropping her eyes, she saw a large open space spread like a big saucer dotted with wild plants, mounds of construction debris and piles of trash. Its depth and scattered puddles of water betrayed its identity as a lake. It must have once teemed with life forms but now there were only a few pond herons which took off when a Brahminy kite landed nearby.

‘I thought you were going to show me what inspires your family and you show me this ... this squatters’ site?’ She laughed.

Vani’s cheeks burned. She had grown so used to the sight from her balcony that she had not realized the lake had become a no man’s land. Even as she looked, a tipper lumbered on the uneven lake bed strewn with trash to drop off its load of stones and rubble.

‘Pathetic!’ Sheela returned to the drawing room. ‘Anyway. Please think over what I said. It’ll be good to have more people in our group.’ Converting a smirk to a smile, she added, ‘Especially those with refined taste like you.’

Vani saw the visitor off and returned to the balcony. The tipper had left but someone had started a fire and thick black smoke was rising in the air spreading an acrid smell of burning rubber.

‘She too thinks I’m inconsequential! What does she know about me? I may be a housewife ... middle aged,’ she added grudgingly, ‘but I still have a lot of fight left in me. How will everyone treat me when I’m old and of no use to anyone? What have I done to myself? My self-esteem? I’ve allowed people to take me for granted ... just like I did with the lake. How’s my situation different from that of the lake? We’re both ridiculed because we can’t hit back?’ Her fingers tightened on the railing. About to land on the balcony, a pigeon veered when it saw her move. The turmoil in her mind had settled.

‘I’ll do the impossible. I’ll save the lake. I’ll show everyone what I can do. Maybe not by myself but by getting people together. I will get the press to write about it, get volunteers, raise money ...’ She hurried to her laptop.

The inbox showed only one new message. The subject line read: Don’t be an obstinate ass, Amma. Come online.

‘You’ll have to wait,’ she muttered and began composing an email addressed to her apartment community.

Subject: Save Our Lake

Hi all, How many of you are aware of a lake in our neighbourhood? Do you know that it is on the brink of extinction? Filth, muck and sewage are killing it slowly. Very soon it will make way perhaps for a building. This will lead to flooding during monsoon and our already sinking water table will fall further. Just because the water in our tap does not come from this particular lake, can we allow it to die? If lakes vanish, won’t we perish? This is a call for all of us to come together to save the lake. Let’s save Kesarahalli Kere and save ourselves.

If you’d like to join this campaign, please email or call. Together we can be the change we wish to see in our neighbourhood. Thanks Vani Venkat Extn: xxxx

She dashed off a conciliatory reply to her daughter and then opened a new Word document to jot down her thoughts. Her fingers flew on the key board as she listed the points starting with 1) Signature Campaign 2) Meet the MLA 3) Govt. ....

After an hour, her ideas became a trickle. She saved the document and returned to her mail.

Six replies already? She read each one aloud.

“This is not a job for us. What’s the government doing?”

Oh! This is not good. She opened another mail.

“Great initiative. Count me in.”

That’s better. She read the next reply:

“I am not sure if I have the competence but I will be happy to join.”

Thank you.

Mr. Shah’s mail was a little longer.

“Dear Madam, I go past the lake every day and not once did it occur to me that it could be saved. Kudos to you. Please include me and my family of 4 adults and 2 teenagers in this herculean task. If the intention is right, nothing is impossible. Saving Nature is saving one’s own family.”

She was about to click on the next message when the telephone rang. It was Sheela.

‘Hi Vani. I just read your mail. Too good, I say! I had a quick word with our President and some others. We feel that our ladies’ group should support you. But why didn’t you tell me that you were planning to do this? I feel so foolish slamming the lake as a lost cause.’

‘Good to surprise people, isn’t it?’ Vani said even as her eyes flickered to the monitor screen and lit up. Her inbox showed three new replies. 

