From: Dr Roshan Radhakrishnan<pythoroshan@gmail.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: The Alternate
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

"Damn that Yorkshireman, Grandma! Look at how confident he is. Even with half his side back in the pavilion, he is still chasing down our target so confidently." As she sat with her twin grandchildren in the wonderful bucket seats directly behind the bowlers mark at the pavilion end of the stadium, the old woman squinted through her round bifocals, her vision hindered by the pearly white translucence within her eyes. She watched carefully as the short, English batting sensation with the shaggy hair walked back to his crease at the end of the over. There was a fire that burned in him visible to everyone in that ground and it impressed her, this passion to win the game against all odds. And somewhere in the back of her mind, the soothing voice of her late grandfather rasped within her ears, narrating the tale he used to wander back to on many a moonless night during the darkness that had plagued her homeland for decades.

*****

"One man alone cannot make a difference." his friends warned him. There was no malice in their words and he knew it. Mohan responded - as he always did - with a polite smile that was as accommodating as it was false. They were his well-wishers and wanted the best for him, he knew. But he knew they were wrong. As the summers had passed by, he had found himself increasingly disillusioned with the news trickling in of the ruling government of his home country. Blood was being shed over caste and cattle, religions and beliefs even in this modern day and age. Charismatic leaders who led the country ran with the hares yet hunted with the hounds in their words and deeds. India was dying from a thousand cuts and no one was bothered.

Angry with the way they were treating his fellow Indians and baffled by their resignation to the boots that held them down, he made a decision that baffled many, including his very own wife and children. He deliberately gave up the luxuries and anonymity that being a NRI - a Non Resident Indian - afforded him and returned back to India to take on the system he believed was wrong, one that suppressed the voice of his countrymen and stifled their freedom. One man could make a difference, he believed. He would prove it to the world.

Perhaps in an alternate world, an alternate timeline even, Mohan would have chosen indifference, the thought of taking on the entire might of the government of a country nothing more than a passing fancy, lost with the first sound of his children squealing as they raced into the bedroom of their quaint little house early on a Sunday, eager to spend time with their father.

But this was not that world, not that timeline.

He found the India he returned to far more complex than the white and black of right and wrong he had visualized from across the seas. His efforts to point out the flaws of the government were mocked not just by the leaders themselves but even by thousands of their devout fans - his own fellow Indians - who were loyal to the rulers of the country.

In seeking to be a beacon of unity, he found himself the face of divisiveness. He sought to engage them in debates but found no takers, people choosing to insult and accuse instead. They doubted his sincerity and questioned his true motives at every turn. They trolled him in articles shared across the fractured nation and world, asking him why he had sat cozily abroad when other events of differential treatment had taken place earlier in India. They sought no answers though as they struck blow after verbal blow upon his slight frame. Every photo from his past was dragged out, every tilt of his body mocked and analyzed. Neither his old fashioned dressing sense nor his crinkly features were spared as caricatures arose aplenty, painting him a buffoon, a simpleton and possibly even an anti-national African spy.

If you don't like it here, get lost, they sneered arrogantly. Get Lost, we don't trust you. Get lost, they repeated over and over again as he walked the length and breadth of the country, trying to help the people - his people - free themselves from the unseen shackles that held them down.

Perhaps in an alternate world, an alternate timeline even, he would have braved the scythes and not given up, realizing the rabid words that hurt him were far less damaging than the loss his countrymen would face were he to leave now.

But this was not that world, not that timeline.

Assaulted without and within with nary a single physical fist landing upon his person, this disillusioned one man gave up the dream of changing the land he grew up in. With silent sneers, caustic words and deafening fire-crackers across hamlets and cities in India celebrating his departure from their soil, he left the land of his birth and returned back to the land across the seas that had welcomed him once before, choosing to lead an inconsequential life abroad.

As the years went by, he became a decent lawyer. He became a good husband. He was a wonderful father to his children. But he did not become the father of the nation. Because Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi made no difference to India. He was no one.

Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi was no one. And India never knew what it lost as it stayed loyal to the British government that ruled it.

*****

"Another four. A perfect straight drive too. He is into his nineties now, Grandma! I really think he is going to win it for England."

Engrossed in the game on the field, the twins did not notice the queer expression that passed by her wrinkled face or the fleeting silence as she sat there, lost in the words of her grandfather. When Elizabeth Bhimlal Gandhi finally spoke, her feeble voice trembled.

"Perhaps in an alternate world, an alternate timeline even. But this is not that world, my children. This Tendulkar chap can threaten us for a few overs with his cover drives and lofted shots but he cannot win it for England. As my grandfather used to often tell us, one man alone cannot make a difference."

 

