From: Mansi Shanbag<shanbagmani@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: So, What Time Do We Meet Tonight?
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

“So, what time do we meet tonight?” Rory whispered into the gigantic tube; a telephone they called it. Rory pressed the receiver closer to his ear to hear the whispered reply, masked by the horrible cackling disturbance. Somebody ought to work harder on this invention, he thought, rolling his eyes.

“11:30 pm, the tunnel. I’m bringing friends.”

“What friends?!” Rory whisper-yelled. But the loud click on the other end told him that his friend Dana had moved on already.

Rory banged the receiver on the dusty table in frustration. Dana should know better. This wasn’t a tea party. This was serious stuff. They were basically suffragists, except what they were fighting for.

As dusk settled slowly around the villa, Rory got up from his crouching corner in the attic. His hands automatically brushed the light gray checkered trousers and smoothed out the creases in his expensive dark gray, almost black, blazer.

His eyes sparkled at the softness of the blazer. Thank god his father was the richest man in town. Good clothes were always welcomed.

He hated the mess that his clothes had to endure every time he had to set up a meeting with Dana and the other ‘suffragists’. The telephone was, unbeknownst to his father, in Rory’s possession, safely hidden in the dirty attic. Surely, his father wouldn’t dream of making an effort to reach out here in the attic, what with its musky smell and my god, the cobwebs.

Climbing down the majestic velvet stairs, Rory was in a good mood, despite Dana’s unfortunate addition.

He had been in a good mood ever since that lazy afternoon six months ago, where he’d dreamt of his late mother. Mother had always been beautiful. Donning a sky blue satin gown, the puffy sleeves adding glamour to her petite figure, and her hair in a tight bun at the nape of her neck, she sat, smiling at him softly; an old memory he never tired of.

The dark satin ribbon across her waist quivered slightly as she turned towards the piano, her fingers running smoothly along its keys, almost gliding through without even touching. The most beautiful sounds were soon heard, like bells hopping alongside the quiet gush of a river at nightfall. Rory was amazed, to say the least. The piano was a new addition. He didn’t quite remember it until that afternoon.

Next day he’d gone running to his father, all of 16 years old, childlike joy reflecting in his eyes.

“Father father, pray tell me about mum.”

Father was firm but indulgent. Sitting across the wide-eyed boy, he spoke the things Rory had always heard of; the beautiful eyes, the valor, the independence, the lovely soft spoken nature.

“No, father, I meant the piano she sat at! Tell me about her music!” Rory interrupted.

Father had never looked more angry when he said, “Rory, I don’t want you mentioning that again, you hear? It’s not safe, son. Never again. You hear?”

Rory understood. He didn’t like it, but he understood.

Nobody, nowadays, would speak of music and get away with it. It was a taboo now. All because of an incident that happened nearly 12 years ago. An incident that changed the world as we knew it. The day the music was killed.

Nobody quite knew what the incident was. It was just referred to as The Incident. It must’ve been pretty bad though.

Some crazy scientist again with a silly theory, I suppose. We must really start asking for proof. I mean, it is 1892. It is after all the 19th century! We’re as advanced as human beings can get. We even have a telephone, for Christ’s sake, Rory thought grudgingly.

Reaching the dining table, he realized Father hadn’t gotten here yet. Looking around to check if anyone was listening, Rory brought his fingers down to the mahogany table, drumming it softly to find a rhythm. The gold corners of the table resounded softly in response to Rory’s incessant drumming on the wood.

Before he knew it, there was a rhythm and he loved it. Letting his guard down, he enjoyed the ‘music’ until a throat cleared itself at the entrance of the room.

Rory whipped his head up to find his butler and Father standing. The butler, having performed his job of announcing the arrival of his owner, moved away to collect the plates. Rory really wished he hadn’t. Because that left him alone. With Father. Who obviously didn’t look like he approved.

“Were you doing what I think you were doing, Rory?” Father bellowed.

Oh no…
