From: Amar Bhandari<amaratna@gmail.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Aftereffects of Dissent
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Overcoming obstacles with a positive attitude, maintaining thin line between being soft-hearted and strong-minded, setting goals and going after them with determination were the traits that have held me in a good stead … Or so I thought!

Today, I have all the so-called trappings of success: a debt-free penthouse overlooking Arabian Sea in South Mumbai, a high flying career, personal cook and driver along with a fat bank balance. Achieving all that I aspired for, believe me was not easy, more so being a girl and trying to break the proverbial glass-celling. But being a new age woman, my contention is that we are not here to break glass ceilings; instead we are here to create new buildings!

But now that I seem to have achieved all that I aspired for, why is there this chronic feeling of emptiness, a feeling of emotional numbness deep inside, that I can’t just seem to get rid of?

But I am getting ahead a bit of myself here …

Flashback to happier times … First day at my first job, I was predictably excited, nervous and unusually quiet. Hadn’t made any friends yet, and not knowing exactly with whom all I'll end up working with, was extra polite to everyone.

Cutting a long story short, was assigned a group and the 1st day itself one colleague who had joined along with me, though he had 2 years’ prior experience caught my eye. It wasn’t love-at-first-sight or so, as being the 1st job was entirely focussed on not to make mess of things and to prove that I had what-it-takes to succeed.

What caught my eye was his general air of assuredness, his poise, Self-deprecating humour and dollops of sarcasm thrown-in for good measure. He was skinny, lanky and tall. And the fact that it was 1st day for both of us in a new company, help us bond because frankly, we were in the same boat – out to prove our mettle in the Big Corporate world.

We soon became good friends, in spite of me falling just short of being branded an introvert. Whereas, he was totally opposite, an out-and-out extrovert, who had an odd habit of whistling all-of-a-sudden, even during work-hours.

As our friendship grew, we talked and talked and got to know each other in a way that no one else would. It is then I realized that there was a class difference. He had faced lots of hardships in childhood and was from lower middle-class family. His father was a government servant and mother, a housewife. They were 4 siblings and the parents, being immigrants, just wanted their kids to get a good education. In spite of all challenges though, he had made it - an engineer by education and now in a promising IT job with a blue-chip company, where a bright future beckoned. All-in-all, a self-made man by all standards.

We had a completely magical year together, but strictly in friend zone. We got on like a house-on-fire. Then he got an onsite opportunity and had to travel abroad on short work-assignment. Not sure if it was the distance apart or what, but he proposed on phone and I accepted after a while.

Because frankly, I too was in love. It’s hard to describe the feeling of being in love for the first time. Ones senses come alive. One doesn’t even think of possibility of a break-up, simply because it has never happened to one before. First love is filled with the optimism that one will be together forever.

On his return, we both got an onsite opportunity to work in USA – the promised land! Before we departed, we both broke the news to our respective family and with minor version of Indian family drama, both families engaged and before we could gather our wits, we were engaged and married – all within 2 weeks. To borrow a Hindi phrase, it was a classic case of “Chat Mangani, Pat Byaah”.

Laughing and dancing with my would-be-hubby at our marriage party, I thought I might actually burst with happiness. Surrounded by our family and friends, I couldn’t stop looking at him and feeling certain that I had met the man I was going to spend the rest of my life with.

The future was in plain sight of mine – we would travel onsite, earn money, come back to India after couple of years, buy our own house and then settle down with kids to follow. I had it all chalked out.

And life unfolded down-to-the script initially. We were young, recently married and in a new country. So everything was fun, an experience. Travelling and photography were a passion for him and I went along, as I seriously didn’t mind it at the time.

He was romantic, sincere but had his head in the clouds, sort of quixotic in nature. Initially I found all this to be adorable as it was totally in contrast with my personality. But these same personality traits of his would later start annoying me.

After spending 4.5 years in USA, we mutually decided to move back to India. Came back and after going through an arduous task of selecting a property in Mumbai, we moved in to our own house after 3 months. Life seemed to be set and we were kind of thrilled with settling down in this grown-up life.

We were doing good and when things were looking all rosy, that is when the proverbial shit hit the fan. He had an idealistic way of looking at things, be it personal or professional aspect of life. And due to some differences with his manager, he simply resigned from his job and walked away. And while he was “between jobs”, financial crisis of 2008 hit hard, triggering a global crisis.

It was hard times no doubt, but not one that we couldn’t withstand, especially if we hunkered down and faced the crisis head-on. They say adversity brings one closer together, and at first it did. But as time went by, my career took off; I slowly started to resent my husband as he drifted from one dead-end job to another. I was more miffed at the fact that in spite of his intelligence, he didn’t have a proper career per-say. And what go my goat was this didn’t bother him one bit. He seemed to be in his own world, planning annual road-trips, planning to watch movies every weekend and the fact that he had a typical Big North Indian family close by and him at beck-and-call for them started getting to me. Hindsight is 20-20 and all these were incredibly insignificant, but they began to rankle me.

At times, I wished that he could have a more stable job, more sophisticated job-profile, earned more. These feeling were accentuated when I saw my friends, peers on a different trajectory and started feeling jealous of them. This was start of the downward slope. I stopped thinking of him as an equal, instead I began seeing him as a hindrance, as someone who was hell-bent on holding me back.

The same qualities that previously had attracted me – his intelligence, his way with words, his sense of humour with healthy bout of sarcasm, his belief in himself and his determination not be part-of-the-herd started irritating me no ends. Without even me realizing it, I had turned into a nagging wife, criticising each and every move of his. Against his wishes, but just to be away from all the nagging he eventually took a high profile job with a start-up. This start-up was for USA-based company and hence he had to work USA timings, which meant he left for office around 2 PM, when I was in office and returned back at unearthly hours of 2 or 3 AM when I was fast asleep. Being a start-up, his job-profile was demanding and at times he had to pitch-in with extra efforts on weekends too. Before spent every evening together and now he was not even available on weekends. This frustration too, I squarely blamed on him only.

Things came to such a state that I saw him as a failure and was so fed up with our almost daily fights, that I decided to move away. We both spent hours crying, talking. He tried to convince me to stay but I was convinced that if I was not strong now, I would regret it for life. In my mind, things were crystal clear as to what needed to be done. When I thought about how my parents would react to this news, I knew they would be horrified. But this irritated me more, because I thought there reaction was not because of the decision to move away per-say but because I am a girl and making a unilateral decision of moving away. The feminist in me failed to see any other angle to this decision. Predictable my parents were upset, more so because they thought he was a good match for me and the best reason he truly loved me.

But I stuck to my guns. For me, right to dissent was integral to both sexes. But who draws the line between legitimate and illegitimate dissent? Or for that matter, how do we define the limits of dissent? Frankly, I wasn’t thinking all that at that time. In my mind, it was very clear that if I had to make anything of my life, I had to first get away from this toxic relationship. He was crying, and pleaded with me not to leave him and it was a torture to see a man I had loved to break down completely in front of me. But I had to be resolute, and I was.

I did move away. For some time, even after our divorce we stayed in touch. But then we drifted away.

Today, I am 43 and have almost all things that define a successful woman except for a loving husband and a family – with kids of my own. You see I never found another one like him, who trusted me and truly loved me. More than that he was my best friend.

Behind the scenes, I am nowadays almost always crumbling under pressure. With my life teetering so precariously to maintain a balance, anything that tipped the scales just so slightly would be enough to bring it all crashing down.

To those of you who are taking their spouse for-granted, forget spouse it can be any relationship or even friendship – please don’t. Please take life at its face-value and do not create or infer unhappiness where there’s none else the regret might stay with you for life. Let that be a lesson, one never forgets. 

