From: Avinab Datta<avinabbdatta@gmail.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Banners
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Nearly a week before I first met her, or them, I had witnessed an accident on the flyover: a biker, riding up full throttle, misjudged a pothole’s depth and swerving away at the last moment flew and crashed through one of the banners (wishing a local minister happy birthday) hung along the flyover. Later, I wondered if he’d done it of his own volition. What if, that particular day, he’d found the minister’s stark face staring back at him and the meaning he found there unbearable? They didn’t remove the ripped banner for weeks. From the promenade, from my spot, if you peered through its hole, your eyes would often cross a biker or a driver looking back, and that hole circling the hollow air loomed, temporarily, above the bay like some kind of spontaneous flag, like a vague resistance to a vague invasion.

I was even there the day (the day I met her, or them) it was pulled down and replaced with the banner of a minister riding an anthropomorphic leopard, surrounded by his partymen floating on, what appeared to be, carpets sewn out of paddy fields.

Early afternoon I took a train to Crawford to make a pick from Aziz; he peddled from the steps of the meat market. No one except the one taking a hit ever sat on the steps, they would all be spread out horizontally, sprawled across chicken shit and feathers, wedded to each other by a chorus of coughs. The only thing you could do is keep your nose and mouth plugged with smoke. It’s interesting to note that Aziz is blind, but not anosmic, and neither does he smoke, so one could say that he fell slightly short of perfection. If he had to be impaired in some way, his working environment required that he didn't have a nose, or that he didn’t breathe, at least not in any conventional sense. Like me he was brought to Bombay by his father and then abandoned by him for a woman back in the village. I’ve often tried to match other references, but our similarities end there.

Aziz was in a decent mood; he had hailed in one of the butchers and offered me a chicken. I refused. After smoking a round with him I crossed over from the market toward Metro, passing my former college on the left, and cut past the wave of students going over to Sunshine for a drink. There I was again, for a moment, a tiny pin at the edge of the pavement, where I rightfully should’ve been at my age. I had been waiting for my new college to find a teacher for my department, but at the same time I was indebted to them for taking me in at such short notice. Elphinstone! Whose corridors, creaks, and crunches house endless birds, the phlegm of light on its planks, the Government’s Department of Archives with which the college shares its space, and whose peculiar nomenclature intrigued me more than its possible presence.

The Department of Archives, The Department of Archives! I used to keep humming in my brain until that phrase morphed into a grand lack. The college was looking for a teacher to revive the History Department and help me, their only student, graduate. The department offices shuffled every week and so did its staff. I remember a blind guy in charge of a phone booth outside the gates who’d been sent in by the college one day as guest lecturer, thinking no one would notice, or maybe he wouldn’t notice that he was, instead of minding the phone booth, sitting in a deserted classroom. He sat in his chair until the bells went off, taking off his glasses once in a while to wipe them on his sleeve. And once looking for the Hindi HOD's office, after being directed through the foyer and its spiral staircase, I found myself at a precipice that opened further onto a vast terrace where a man stood under the shade of an eave accompanied by a decrepit water-cooler and a few nodding pigeons. These are not, not a single one of them, complaints, instead, the college’s profound ease with which it dealt with absences, both mine and its own, suited my narrative of not feeling defeated, of not lamenting the loss of culture, just fine. The sheer number of the nation’s luminaries the college could boast to have hosted in the past and its rapid present day decline gave me my own proxy passage to believe that I too was once at the lava of culture in my life, but then the impossibility of the outer world took over and we receded into darkness, a sweet, nostalgic darkness, where we sit tight and nothing can no longer intervene.

On my way back in the train I sat across Vivek’s girlfriend who’d come on at Marine Lines. I’d seen her getting on, and terrified that she might come for the only vacant seat, which was across me, I had considered moving away, but hadn’t. I wasn’t sure if they were still together. She was aware of me but didn’t recognize me. On an outdoor camp, while a few of us were in the tent drinking beers, I hadn’t realized that it was already dusk outside, and stepping out to take a piss I saw the other boys coming in from the woods carrying twig piles for the bonfire, and as I darted through the trees to find a spot I’d seen Vivek’s girlfriend weeping on a rock by the river. I consider that an intimate experience. It’s terrible because, when it comes to names and people, or most things for that matter, I’m an amnesiac or pretend to be one, but I find myself recalling most people or names, even people I haven’t met properly, but they don’t. I got up and stood near the foot-board and though I had another station to go I got off at Mahim and started walking toward Reclamation. Outside the station I saw a doll’s arm lying on the pavement and picked it up. It was a crooked arm, melted around the elbow, the burn had caramelized its skin leaving only the small fingers and palm a disgusting shade of white. I pocketed the arm and was about to cross the road when a couple of men cornered me and asked to check my pockets. I asked them why; it didn’t work and they frisked me.

Why had I picked up the arm? They asked me.

I was struck by it, I said, so I picked it up.

They flung the arm and frisked me again and found the charas and took it. Even the little money I had. I had a stubbed out joint wedged behind my ear but they didn’t notice it. When I asked them to leave me some bus fare to get home they gave me back a tennner. I waited for them to cross over and started walking again. It was dusk, the black raining down in bits, then coated around swarms of mosquitoes buzzing in my hair. At Reclamation the sea had receded, baring the scarred bed, the stones slick with oil and the staccato of plastic. A moored boat bobbed at the corner of the bay, the tricolours painted on its side barnacled and stained by moss. Rats scuttled in and around the boat, around the black rocks which seemed to break off, re-align, as crabs moved across its surface. Couples were lining up along the railings, one by one sailing in as the light kept slipping across their faces, the girls gazing beyond the boys' shoulders at the seabed, the towers across, then their vision struck across by a sound, a stone crashing somewhere on the black surface. I loved this game; how their faces shook up, as if giants birds had crashed into their eyes and shattered their vision, and some of them noticed, made eye-contact, some of them closed their eyes, embraced their guys tighter, but the one who noticed, her eyes never moved, she pinned the breath with me and let go only when the guy sensed something else inside her body, then turned, hung by the air.

I turned to the corner of the bay and saw a figure standing near the boat holding an orange piece of cloth in its hand. I picked up a stone and threw it across the bed, which by now had melded with the dark, except a few neon scars from faraway buildings. The figure walked further into the bed, until I could no longer see it. I jumped down from the promenade toward the boat and crouching behind it, guided by neon, I watched the figure standing motionless at the foot of the murmuring water. The cloth, as I looked closer, was thick, had something wrapped inside it. The figure looked around again, now holding the cloth with both hands. Then it started walking into the water.

Let it go, I thought, what do I even say?

Is there anything satisfying I could’ve said, like ‘hey, wait’, and for what?

I knew the water wouldn’t be deep for a long stretch, at least it appeared so. I turned toward the promenade to check how far in I was. When I turned back the figure wasn’t there anymore. I picked up a stone and hurled it into the dark. Nothing. I walked up a little further and in no time felt water around my ankles. I’ll go in till my knees, I decided, and kept walking, but the water didn’t rise beyond my ankles. I stopped and pushed my eyes deep into the air, gathering the force of my whole body to see. Nothing. I couldn’t see or hear anything. In front of me, underneath me, I felt coarse rocks, uneven, and with another step, my knees crashed into one of them. I put out my palm, feeling for a rock’s face, and gripping its sides, sat behind it. Impossible, scabrous rocks; the only form of dark I could sense with my hands. The only thing intimate about them was the residual warmth of the sun, but that didn’t recognize me. As I stood there bathed in the dark I remember thinking of my mother, for some reason I recalled the fresh purple bruise above her right eye, the way it shone when she had looked up at me while walking out of the lane one morning.

A stray light from the shore sawed across and in its flare I saw the figure again on my right. I had overshot her and there she was, head bent, still holding the cloth in her hands. By now I was sure or had assumed it was a woman, there was no specific reason for me to believe it, but that’s how I wanted it to be. I was so close to her that I couldn't think of speaking, I didn’t have much to say, so I kept staring, waiting for her to notice me, and now to think of it, it didn’t occur to me that she could’ve been terrified by my intrusion. She just wouldn’t notice me, she never looked up. I gave up and leaned further back behind the rock. I had caught a glimpse, a presence, and now it was fairly easy to see her outline, her hands, the cloth. She went down on her knees in the water and stared at the cloth for a while. She unfolded the top of the cloth and the white head of a cat, now limp, sprung out of it, flowing downward from its fold. With a finger underneath its neck to hold it up, she leaned forward and kissed its head and shut eyes, folded the cloth around its body again then set it adrift. I waited. When I could no longer see the floating cloth and grew tired of waiting for her to turn around and notice me I walked back into the light of the promenade, into a tide of scabrous laughter. Men and women were sitting in a circle around the tiny patch of lawn, laughing their heads off as joggers went past them. A kid, probably led astray from his parents, was staring at them. Then he took off, scuttling frantically across the joggers’ legs, and tripped on an uneven cobblestone and instantly sprung back up. Too late to look away, he saw me gazing at him and let out a terrible wail. And I turned the other way. And I saw her.

I had seen her earlier in the day when I skipped the underpass to get to Reclamation. Skipping the underpass meant crossing a stretch of highway. She had walked past me, sandwich in hand, to sit on one of the railings at the curb. It’s not the first time I’d seen her around, I'd noticed her before; hair swept back, she had one of those faces inhabited by an invisible murmuring of light. I’d happily watch her perform simple, necessary acts, like eating a sandwich; she had the thrall of being aware of being watched, it made her twitch in the air, as if she were conducting private, minor starbursts. As I was watching her, four guys crossed over from the rear of a topiary placed at an arterial junction of the road. They observed her from a distance, arms slung around each other’s shoulders. When she was done eating she sprung up and circled around, wrapper inside her clenched fist.

Looking for a bin, I thought.

She walked up a little further and turned and started walking back toward me, oblivious of the boys who, after a series of oral squeaks to get her attention, had also pulled out a music player and kept shuffling songs in rapid succession. She was about to pass them when they blocked her path.

Why hadn't she thrown the wrapper?

Phek de na, I heard one of the boys tell her.

She looked up at them.

She stuffed the wrapper into her mouth and swallowed it.

She bared her teeth and stared straight into one of their eyes, I fucking eat them, she told him, before breaking them up and walking past them.

I had walked away from them toward the promenade. It was the peak of noon, not a nail of shade anywhere. I lit a joint and had nearly planted a fleeting idea on one of the circling gulls when a crowd shot past me downward. Then more. I followed them. When I got there the crowd was already packing her into a rickshaw; blood trickled down her forehead, and as she entered the rickshaw I noticed the front teeth, missing, her t-shirt halved from the center, holding out like an unzipped jacket.

It was her, sitting across me now, her upper lip swollen, so her mouth was slightly open, as if she were about to speak or had finished speaking. I wasn’t sure what I was supposed to do, or whether I was supposed to do anything at all. Why did I think that I was supposed to do something? I thought of the doll’s arm I had picked up on the road. Why had I picked it up? But I never asked myself these things. I thought of the woman immersing her cat. The kid was still wailing at the back and the laughing club had circled around him trying to talk to him, pacify him. I pulled out the joint from behind my ear, it had mysteriously stuck on there, and turned to her.

Do you..?

Yes, she said, even before I could finish my sentence.

Was that you? I asked her

Who?

I have never asked her again. I knew someone’s pet, a cat, had died and someone had come to set it adrift. I saw her setting the cat adrift. I’m in love with that, with her, her dead cat, and her, and some shining failure in me. Who is she? Now I’m with her but when I touch her I want to know if it was her out in the water that evening. Do I want to know that more than knowing how she feels about what happened to her? She’ll never know. I’ll never know. She never talks about what happened. Even if she does, what sense will she make of it, what will she know, and what do I say to her; that I was a partial witness to everything that had happened to her –what part of knowing is important and what part of it will we know? But, importantly, what about that stand she took and how that gesture now seems invisible, buried inside all of this? Is it? She’s buried it inside her, this gesture she believed in at all costs. And what am I doing to not bury it? I’m pursuing my own story. Whenever we talk about the days that led up to her, I mention the biker, the college, Aziz, the politician, the banner stuttering by the sea, and we flare up, but we’re together, in the disappointment and wrongness of it all we’re together, and nothing, nothing happened to her.



