From: Priyanka Sethy<priyankasethy189@gmail.com>
Date: 09 December 2016 19:00
Subject: Unearthing
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

The slightest mention of her, and my father’s eyes well up with the salty proof of his grief. My mother chooses to manifest hers with silent, daggered stares of painful accusation. Their points have sharpened with every passing summer, till I wonder if it is truly grief behind them anymore, or anger at these abrupt disruptions in her quiet struggle to continue with our lives.

Madhav first visited our humble two-bedroom house as the friend of a guest’s nephew on the day I turned fifteen. My sister had been eighteen and I could tell that she was struck by the almost god-like beauty that he possessed and carried around like a roadside *fakir* parading a particularly gaily coloured parrot. She stole him away from the men’s conversations to show him the moon – the sad moon that struggled to glow against the backdrop of blue smoke and factory chimneys in our little industrial town. I had wanted to follow, but my father, having heard that this young eligible bachelor was settled with a job in Chandigarh, held me back, a faraway gleam in his calculating eyes. The silhouettes behind the blue screen of the terrace door laughed in unison, one breathtakingly beautiful. Then Ma sternly called them in for dinner, but Madhav got a phone call on his smart new Nokia and had to leave immediately. I knew acutely that Ma and Papa had wanted him to stay. I had too.

We didn’t see him for long after that, and shiny new suitors wearing cheap imitations of imported sunglasses took his place. She turned twenty-two, then twenty-three, and the pressure increased. On the weekends, they would come in groups with their families, they would sit and exchange presents, but oh, none of them were good enough for my lovely sister. She really wasn’t even that pretty, come to think of it. Her black hair was usually a frizzy mess and a slightly larger distance between her eyes would have been quite an improvement. But she had been to college for a short while, and this gave her airs of sophistication. I suppose being able to read strange books in English came with its own price. She scared the living daylights out of those dainty men who came asking for her unattainable hand. Soon the gaps between each suitor’s visit grew larger. It was frustrating enough that half of them turned out to be scum trying to make away with Papa’s money. That’s the trouble with sisters – there’s just so much responsibility on your hands. Sometimes she would come up with strange notions of running the failing family business alongside Papa and I, or of going far, far away to work in a shop by herself, but all this was soon put out of her head when Papa took away her books. I have to admit, I was a little relieved as well.

I don’t think any of them remembered Madhav by then. Ma certainly didn’t recognize him when he graced us with his presence for a second time. I had spotted him from the balcony that day, walking out of a red Maruti that he parked outside our wrought iron gate. What I supposed was his family followed close behind, carrying trays of sweets. My rubber slippers clattered against the stairs as I ran down, nearly falling over in the process. But the scene that met my eyes was hardly what I had expected. He was sitting in the great armchair that was usually dusted for the next suitor’s arrival, and the parents were talking in hushed voices that slithered across the floor and into the kitchen, where my sister was making tea with the affectedly bored look that was reserved for the now not-so-shiny and not-so-new suitors wearing cheap imitations of imported sunglasses.

“He’s here! In our house!” I was slightly out of breath with excitement. “Who is?” she turned to look at me, dispassionately. “Madhav.” “Madhav who?” And that’s when I realized that Madhav was here as a potential suitor, but neither they nor him realized that we had encountered him once before, on a balmy monsoon night at a birthday party under the full moon. I reminded her. “It’s not him. This one is a Pranav” “Yes, it is.”

They didn’t believe me, and I was too shy to ask, or to go talk to him. But she had gone ahead and sealed the deal in any case. I opened the door a crack, and briefly glanced at the gathering. My father looked happier than I had seen him in years, and I could almost see the rivulets of worry that creased near my mother’s eyes recede. In the smoke-filled kitchen, surrounded by the intoxicating smell of cloves and cigarettes, she told me they were discussing her dowry.

“This Pranav is settled in America. They want a lot. But he speaks so well.” Her excitement was not infectious. America. That was a lifetime’s journey away. I wouldn’t see them for an indefinable amount of time after her wedding. My fingers clenched the teacup so hard that they left grimy, dirty prints on the gaudy floral print. There was a silence. “You’ll miss me, won’t you?” I didn’t say anything. I couldn’t.

The sum they finally decided on included not only nearly four-fifth of my mother’s jewellery and the entirety of my father’s savings, but also the little amount she herself had collected through part-time translation jobs at the post office. But they all agreed, for what was possibly the first time, that it was worth it. Jewellery and currency alike were packed into a large iron trunk and kept with the rest of her belongings. The wedding was on a Thursday. Madhav visited us a few times before, but he didn’t refer to our first meeting, and met me with new introductions but with the same deep eyes. Work kept me working throughout most of the week, and the wedding passed in a daze of tears, both of joy and otherwise.

My one task was now to take her, her trunk full of dowry, and her bridegroom to the railway station the next morning. They were headed to ugly, sinful Delhi, from where they would get onto an airplane to America. She was excited, of course she was. Madhav and his brother carried the precious trunks, and she wore the key to her new house on a thin rope around her neck. Progress was slow. The station wasn’t far but I suppose women have a hard time walking in all their bridal finery. Madhav walked jauntily by her side as she moved with slow, measured steps and once stumbled on the carefree pebbles littering the dusty path. He dutifully offered her his arm, but she quietly picked up a stick somewhere along the way and leant on it for support. I silently brought up the rear. The dry and diseased wind rattled around us, making up for the lack in conversation.

We reached the railway station too early, far too early, and I waited with them. She sat on the stone bench, swatting away the hungry flies that buzzed in the summer heat around us. The platform was mostly deserted, so I stayed, following my instructions to see them off till they were safely out of sight, out of our lives. Madhav and his brothers decided to leave the trunks in the storage room, so that they could go to the *paan *shop near the station for a smoke. They left, carrying the heavy trunks between themselves. I imagine she was hot under her heavy red veil of silk, but I could see a corner of her mouth curved up in a smile.

The angry sun God watched our charade, and beat down incessantly, punishing the sins of every Indian unfortunate enough to be out of reach of a cool fan, or a wet rag. It rose higher in the sky, reaching its zenith and stilling the air. But the damn flies didn’t give up. The collar of my best shirt, the blue one with yellow embroidery, stuck uncomfortably to my neck. The train was due in fifteen minutes, but Madhav hadn’t returned. “He’ll show up,” I said to her. She did not respond, but finally removed her veil. Frizzy strands of hair shot up immediately, intensified by the heat and sweat from her scalp. She was unperturbed, terrifyingly so.

The train came and went, with no sign of Madhav. We sat together in silence, her and I, till I could take it no more. The sky in the distance was made up of blue and orange bands by now, with a darkening streak of violet overhead. I didn’t dare look at her face. Finally, I walked to the storage room, to get the trunks and go home. But the old man with a painfully pinched face and crimson uniform who was manning the counter there told me that no such trunks had been deposited that day. A porter, overhearing us, rushed to inform me that three laughing men had left earlier, with those sort of trunks, and had driven away in a red Maruti.

When I went back to the platform, she was no longer on the bench. She faced the sun, and the flyway wisps of her hair were on fire with the red and gold rays of a dying sun. I went towards her, empty handed, and she turned around. She didn’t say anything, but she knew. Reaching for the neck of her sari, she pulled away the key and threw it onto the tracks. Then, holding the stick in her right hand, and the veil of her sari in her left, she strode along the tracks in the direction of Delhi. 

