From: Durgeshkumar Srivastava<merepyarebaba@gmail.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Once Upon a Time, There Were a King and His Two Queens
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Nani, Amma's mother, was a great story teller. All her stories had either a moral or a subtle retort, indirectly directed towards someone. If she wanted to put down a person, she would weave a story to achieve her purpose. The story was then told and retold by all people who heard it, thereby crushing the person socially. Here below is one such story which Nani would narrate with relish, mimicing the parts of the various characters herself, suitably changing her voice modulation and accent. 

Once upon a time, there was a King. He had married the daughter of a neighboring King who was the ruler of a bigger and richer kingdom. His wife, the Queen, whom the King addressed as Maharani, was haughty and arrogant because of her higher status and carried an air of superiority when dealing with her husband, the King. But he said nothing and continued to live in peace with her. But his heart was restless

One day the King went into the forest for hunting. He lost his way and was loitering hungry and thirsty, when he came upon a small hut of a tribesman. The KIng alighted from his horse and called out "Koi hai?" (Is there someone inside?) A beautiful young girl came out. She was dressed in tatters, but her exquisite beauty mesmerized the King. He asked for some water and food and a place to rest. She invited him inside and made him comfortable on a mat on the floor. She brought him cool water, some fruit juice and fruits. The King went into a restful sleep. The girl fanned the sleeping King with a hand fan.

When the King woke up refreshed, he found an elderly man standing next to the girl. The man was also in tattered clothing. He touched the feet of the King and said that he knew the King and asked for his forgiveness if the girl, who was his daughter, had not provided him the requisite hospitality befitting a King. He said that he would guide the King through the thick forest to his palace. The King thanked him and took out some gold coins from his pocket to reward the man. The man said that more than the reward, he would be much obliged if the King could find a match for his daugher among his soldiers or courtmen. The King assured the old man that he would do something for him.

That night the King was sleepless, lying next to Maharani, who was snoring loudly.The King was lost in the thought of that beautiful tribal girl in the forest. Her beautiful face, her eyes, her lips, her wavy hair, her curvaceous figure, her sweet voice, her smile and her way of making him comfortable .... all filled the imagination of the King. He was unable to put that girl out of his mind.

He recalled how her father had requested him to find a suitable match for her among his soldiers. Soldiers? Why? She was made for a King. He decided to marry her himself and make that beautiful girl his junior Queen.

Next day, after consulting the royal priests and his ministers, he set out on the royal elephant, escorted by soldiers on horsebacks, and accompanied by precious gifts on horsecarts, and reached the hut in the forest. The wedding in the forsst was a simple affair but it was performed as per tradition and all religious rituals. The girl became a Queen. She was welcomed in the kingdom with joyful fanfare and lengthy celebrations. The King named her Phool Rani, the flower queen. (NANI had deliberately chosen the name Phool Rani for the junior queen to spite someone which only she knew.) Maharani, the senior queen was irked and left temporarily to spend time in her father's neighboring Kingdom. But multiple marriages was an established prerogative of Kings in the ancient times and she could not prevent it. She accepted her SAUT (co-wife) with a sullen heart and returned to her husband's palace after a few weeks.

The King had, meanwhile, constructed a lavish second palace for Phool Rani, where he was having a pleasant honeymoon with his new queen. He named this new palace PHOOL MAHAL. This irked the senior queen further, whe felt a burning jealousy for her rival. But she could do nothing. Even her father, back home, had two queens. 

The King would spend most of the time with the new queen in the Phool Mahal. The elder queen would have a heart burn when she burned in jealousy looking at the gaily decorated Phool Mahal from the window of her old palace. 

One day, Maharani, the senior queen, could bear it no longer. She called for the royal Palki and proceeded towards Phool Mahal to confront her husband. The guards dared not stop Maharani and she walked straight into the bedroom of her husband, where he was holding Phool Rani in his arms and tickling her with Phool Chhadi (a bower of flowers). She was giggling happily. Angered beyond imagination, Maharani snatched the Phool Chhadi from her husband's hands and demanded immediate attention

The King got up from the bed, trying best to cover himself, and looked amusingly at the senior queen with raised eyebrows. This further angered Maharani who demanded in a sharp voice .... 

"Why do you pay so much attention to this lowly tribal woman. I am from a royal ancestry and I am your senior queen. Why do you neglect me and are infatuated with this bitch.”

The King smiled and said mildly ... "I will answer your question in the Royal Court in the presence of my ministers and representatives of the people on the next Purnima (the day of the full moon.) You can choose 3 persons and invite them to this meeting to judge my answer and decide if I am guilty of any wrongdoing. Please go now

Maharani smiled to herself thinking that the King was now trapped. She could now choose the three judges from her father's family who would pronounce the King guilty and end his second marriage null and void. She left smiling and arranged to send messages to her father, elder brother and the husband of her elder sister to come to the Royal Court meeting on the next day of full moon. She felt triumphant at the thought of turning out Phool Rani from the palace and send her back to the forest.

Knowing that she had made all the listeners extremely curious, NANI, would then fake sleepiness, promising to continue the story the next day. She was a great psychologist and understood human nature very well. Nani's audience would be dying to hear the rest of the story. What would happen in the Royal Court meeting on the full moon day? Dear readers, you too must be exceedingly curious. I cannot play with your curiosity like Nani used to with her audience. Here the rest of the story.

The Royal Court meeting began to a full house. The King sat on the high throne. On one side of him sat Maharani (with a triumphant scowl on her face) and on the other side of him sat Phool Rani (with a cute smile on her face). On one side there was a high podium on which sat the three judges .... Maharani's father, elder brother and her elder sister's husband, all in the finest Royal attires. 

The judges, in one cammanding voice, asked the senior Queen Maharani to make her allegations against her husband or ask questions from her husband, the Royal King. The senior queen Maharani spoke in her usual harsh voice laden with a tone of triumph. She demanded the reason why her husband neglected her.She knew that the judges will reject whatever answer or explanation her husband, the King, would give.

 The judges now looked at Maharani's husband, the Maharaja, the King, who got up from the throne, bowed his head in reverence to the Judges (his father in law and brothers in law) and came into the center of the court, where an ornate table and two chairs had been set beforehand. He took out two sheets of paper and two pens from his pocket, looked at the judges and spoke loudly ....

Your Highnesses, the Honorable Judges, I have here these two sheets of paper and pens with me .... I have written a question on each sheet. The question is the same for both the queens. They have to come now, take this pen and write their answers to my question. The completed answers are to be submitted to you and you are requested to read them aloud for the whole assemby to hear. Then you, Honorable Judges, consider both answers and pjronounce your judgement on Mahanarii's complaint. With these words, the King handed over the sheets to the two queens. They sat down at the table to write their answers.The audience looked in curious silence. The atmosphere was tense. Everyone was on the edge of his seat.

After both queens had submitted their answers in folded sheets to the Judges, the elder queen Maharani felt triumphant and demanded that the judges first read the answer submitted by Phool Rani.

Maharani's elder brother,the Judge, read out the question given to Phool Rani. The King's question to his junior wife was: 

"Queen Phool Rani, Tell us how do you know that it is morning."

The judge now loudly read out the answer written by Phool Rani.

"I know that it is morning when the cool breeze coming from the window of my room carries to me the sweet fragrance of the fresh buds and flowers in the garden. There is in the air a sweet melody of birds singing in the garden. I open my eyes, smile softly and know that it is morning now. “

There was all round clapping and applause in the hall. Everyone was smiling and praising the delicately beautiful answer given by Phool Rani. Even the judges were smiling broadly. The King, the husband of Phool Rani looked with adulation towards his junior wife, his face lit up with love. It took some time for the applause to end and the meeting now became silent and curious to hear the question and answer from the senior queen, Maharani.

Now the sheet submitted by the senior queen was taken up by the panel of Judges. The senior most Judge, Maharani's father took up the sheet in his hands and stood up to read it loudly.

First the question, he said. The question is: 

"Maharani, Tell us how do you know that it is morning."

The elder queen had given this answer. It was read loudly.

"I know that it is morning when I feel my stomach bloating with pressure of gas. I open my eyes and run towards the toilet, knowing that it is morning now. “

The meeting hall erupted into a pandemonium of laughter and the audience stood up clapping and pointing their fingers at Maharani and laughing again and again. Some people doubled up in laughter forgetting the court room etiquette. Even the judges could not control their laughter. The biggest smile was on the face of the King, the husband of Maharani. He knew the result. Only Phool Rani remained silent, with no smile or show of victory. She was all grace.

Sensing defeat, Maharani, the elder queen, huffly walked out of the meeting hall with her Pallu slipping from head, her hair disheveled.

Nana was a very jovial man. He would smile in his typical way and pose as if he had failed to properly hear the answers of both queens. He would ask Nani to repeat the last part of the story. Nana must have heard this story dozens of times, but he always had that special smile in which both the lips and eys smile in a naughty way.

Nani outlived Nana by almost two decades. Nani was very beautiful, fair in complexion, slim in body and with very good features. I know that Nana secretly compared Nani with Phool Rani and felt elated to have such a beautiful and intelligent life partner. Nana influenced me in many ways ...encouraging me to read, be social and caring, and to take interest in cricket, chess, bridge and music. I owe much to him and remember him to this day with love and admiration. 

