From: Arun Budhathoki<arun.jesse2@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Killing Her Lover
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

She rubbed her teary eyes, failing to wipe it, as her hands became heavier than the stones besides the raging river.

The sky burst into tears, birds flied away, and children ran holding each other’s’ hands. The windowpanes of the houses next to them were weeping bitterly. She laid on the sofa, sulking, stretching her body wide apart. 

Pain exasperated Reema. But silence did more to her. She stared at the tea cup that her boyfriend had gifted. 

What a twee cup. Reema thought. Everything appeared strange to her. Yet she tried to hobnob with what was left. She tried to gather pieces of her which was scattered here and there. 

It was only last year that she started dating her boyfriend but soon found that he had ossified after his breakup. He had come to believe that living a sedentary life and having sex was the only thing he ever wanted to do. 

Reema termed his behaviour as canaille and offered to help him. But he blatantly refused to go to the hospital and even scolded her for trying to do such thing to him. He blackmailed her saying that he would stop loving her and making love would no more happen. She was left distraught. The only option to appease him was to accept what he said and also not get bothered by how he lived. 

The day after they made love, Reema’s boyfriend had tried to miche, and after couple of failures he succeeded. Since that day he was nowhere to be found. He had cut off all possible contacts with her. It broke her in pieces. 

One morning Reema dreamed that her boyfriend was hospitalized in a mental ward and he was being galvanized. The hospital smelled of death and diseases. She did her best to not get depressed out of it. Every morning Reema did yoga. It helped her immensely. That place looked like as if it was an endemic for madness. 

Mad doctors. Mad people. Mad hospitals. Mad everything.

Mad all. 

One morning Reema’s friend sent her text saying that she had seen something awful about her and wanted to talk with her about it. She wondered what it was. They agreed to meet for lunch. 

At the café Reema’s friend sat in front of her, looking pale, and her body shivering. She wasn’t sure as what had happened and wondered what she really wanted to say. The waiter came and asked what they wanted to have.

She asked for two milk tea with lots of sugar. 

The waiter arrived at their table with two tea cups and placed it on the table. Reema began to enjoy the tea and waited for her friend to speak up. 

Her friend held the cup but her hands were shivering and then she broke into tears. Reema wasn’t scared at all but she felt her heart was dying

slowly. The waiter rushed towards the table and asked if everything was all right. She said yes. 

“It is about your ex-boyfriend,” said Sita. Reema shivered, her eyelids flapping constantly, and hands shaking. 

Sita wiped her eyes and took control of herself. She took a deep breath, cleared her voice, and stared at the ceiling. 

“Your boyfriend taped you two while making out,” said Sita and she left immediately without waiting for Reema to react and respond. 

Reema was left behind shattered and left alone to gather her broken pieces.

She couldn’t fathom as what had happened. 

How could that bastard do such a horrible thing to me? She straightaway left the café without paying. The café owner later scolded the waiter and told him to either pay for the loss or leave the job. The waiter was a poor fellow and had no option but to run after Reema. 

Reema walked quickly towards nowhere. She suddenly had no destination and no future in her life anymore. She continued to walk fast till she reached a certain point where she forgot to walk, breathe and collapsed. The waiter quickly reached out to her and tried to wake her up. He called for help. No one responded and instead he took out the money that she owed and was about to leave. He suddenly remembered Reema’s face. It looked so familiar. He checked his cell phone and found a video clip. He clicked it and saw Reema having sex with a guy. 

Reema woke up. She looked around and saw the waiter standing in front of her. She walked towards him and saw the sex video. She stood motionless, speechless. The waiter realized someone was next to him and turned around.

It was the girl who had ran without paying. 

Reema left without saying anything with strange voices emerging in her mind. 

Voice 1: You should kill that bastard.

Voice 2: No, you should rip him apart.

Voice 1: Just poison him.

Voice 2: Just cut him apart. 

Later that evening Reema sent a text to her former boyfriend that she missed him immensely and wanted to make out with him. He was elated to read the message and quickly reached her home. 

Reema had prepared a lovely dinner and even bought drinks for them. They had a good meal and started to drink. 

Reema’s boyfriend collapsed. She then tied his hands and legs and used a sharp meat-cutting knife to rip his chest and took out his heart and laughed hysterically. That night she slept on the bed while her dead boyfriend was asleep on the floor. 

The next day some of the neighbors smelled a dead body’s corpse and called the police. Reema was taken to the jail and then to the court. 

On Saturday, the judge asked Reema as why she had done such a heinous crime. 

She smiled and replied, “I just wanted to see how big his heart was. I wanted to know how much love he had to do such a terrible crime against me.” 

Everyone remained silent while Reema smiled blankly.





