From: Vaish ax<vaishnavi.shyam@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Come Back Soon and Don’t Drink the Tap Water
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

“Bye, mom!” yelled Maya as she hurriedly cycled her way outside the quarters compound. “Come back soon and don’t drink the tap water,” shrieked her mother sprinting to the door in order to be audible. Maya wouldn’t miss her volleyball summer camp for the world. She has gotten so fervent about the sport after watching her brother, Sathya who was a state-level volleyball player and her paramount source of inspiration. Though she would never admit it in public. She admires him secretly and goes around telling the other kids, “See that guy over there? That’s my brother!” and derives worldly gratification doing so.

The way to the ground was a very beautiful one, with lush green canopy overlooking this little girl’s exhilarated smile, clouds of thick white flamboyance, barring the prickly sunrays. The smell of summer flowers arousing the holiday essence in the kids, that sets the right tone to the beginning of eventful summer evenings.

Maya was always the popular kid in the block and had some exclusivity about her. Barely had friends but always surrounded by people. Most of them didn’t care about her existence and the rest loathed her for always having people buzzing around her. She had a strong animosity towards people who made fun of her peculiar élan. And would often go to great lengths in expressing such contempt, like hitting the ball at her deliberately and pretending to be innocuous. Or getting the older Annas (brothers, in Tamil) to chastise them and make them regret the day they were born. The Annas had a large role to play in Maya’s life, they adored her, and they missed her if she didn’t show up. Would pick her up from home and drop her back if she showed any signs of absenteeism. She would referee their matches, standing on the referee tall stand and would penalize the team that gave her lesser number of chocolates. Life was good.

Every now and then Sathya would accompany her during the ‘beginner’s time’. He would just stay there and chat with his friends. Sathya was not particularly proud of Maya. He loved her yes, but wasn’t exactly okay with proclaiming Maya to be his sister to his friends. She had a boyish facade that he absolutely despised. Beginning from her hair to her clothes, she was THE odd one in a group of girls and for that matter a group of boys too. He would try and make every effort to end a conversation she would have started while he was in the vicinity of his friends. All was fair in the process of growing up, this grudging detachment didn’t bother the two of them much, and they lived merrily in their own little worlds.

It was the end of summer vacation and time for mundane school routines to take over life again. Maya, no matter how many years went by, had a very discernible struggle in breaking the summer camp routine. Sathya had the advantage of being in the school team that let him play volleyball every day after school but Maya had no such option. She was a little too young to be on her school’s team yet.

After every annual camp, a friendly match between the kids was the 'most looked forward to' event. It was customary to let the kids go home on a high note, that they have learned something in the camp and a persuasion to come back next year. All the Annas including Sathya were part of this annual ceremony. They have been around for a while. Though Sathya was still very young compared to the older Annas, Maya always held them in the same league as far as talent was concerned.

It was time for the match and to her dismay, Maya found that she had a previous enemy in her opponent team. A guy who she threw the volleyball at and pretended to stay oblivious – because he would do the same to her! It did not deter her; she knew what she was doing. The match began and tension was in the air. All the Annas and Sathya were seated, waiting, as their ‘proper’ match would be held next.

Every now and then they would hear giggles from the onlookers about the amateur display of the great sport but the only thought that ran inside Maya’s head was: they must have walked this path to be where they are. That elicited her to play even more ferociously. The previous enemy seemed like he had a plan and was up to something. It was his turn to serve and Maya was the center back.

As if caught by curiosity, the ground became silent in the anticipation of what was going to happen in the next few seconds. It was a question of pride for Maya and a matter of revenge for the enemy. Maya could at no cost be inflicted by the shame of losing to a boy who had annoyed her in the past, not in front of Sathya and the other Annas. Her acceptance has already become a matter of concern to her and this would jeopardize everything.

The boy served his best service; the ball flew its way to Maya with such lightning speed, analogous to his anger. For a moment it seemed to Maya that it was the boy himself, flying, holding a fist, about to crash-land on her. For one tiny jiffy, Maya’s eyes met Sathya’s, he looked tensed, but he nodded a ‘you can do it’ sign. She attempts to tackle it, but by the impact, falls down and drops the ball. The whole ground hurled a sigh.

Maya woke up fighting her tears, covering her face in shame. Unable to fathom the plight of witnessing her enemy’s glee and the Annas’ consolation she hoped to vaporize into thin air. Just when she was about to collapse in the abyss of humiliation, she heard Sathya tell his friend, “See that kid over there? That’s my sister”.

Unable to emanate a suitable reaction, she lied down on the ground and laughed in a mad hysteria with tears flowing uncontrollably from her eyes.

