From: KT Jaidip<ktjaidip@gmail.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Dissent
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

The sunrise seemed never ending. The sun quite appalled by all He saw appeared loath to tumble over the horizon and shine. 

They squatted together in silence, staring at the red semi-circle. The crows hovered over the garbage.  The dogs rooted about in it. Here and there a dark pig, burrowing. 

Smoke from their beedis rose up in the still air. A train sped past in the distance, accelerating. 

Karma ya dharma, gottila, said Govindappa, hawking a monstrous ball of phlegm whilst simultaneously unleashing an explosive fart. 

Thimme Gowda gazed past the hills of garbage that enveloped their village in an uneven crescent.  The arrack from last night still sloshed unevenly in his belly. Govindappas statement hung in the morning air ,till gravity did its work and the words cascaded into the Gowdas brain. Yaake? he said. 

We are this said Govindappa, gesturing below his squatting backside at his fresh shit, gleaming a faint red in the light. 

They decide he said, they live, we. . . we just grovel and die…. Yaake, why thought Thimma Gowda. 

With a final volley of hawks and spitting a few more desultory farts,backsides were washed with plastic bottles and discolored water, they made their way back to the village. Broken,defeated,refugees with no direction to run. 

Govindappa, forty years a farmer, bentover, a face etched into a thousand lines by the wind and sun, toes splayed in all directions from balancing a plough. . . I’m too old he said,what can I do?Nobody listens to us,that’s how it has always been and will be.  Karma ya Dharma. 

What say you Gowda? How’s your job in the city? Believe they shit indoors, in cold cool rooms? Yaake thought Thimme again. . . 

On the bus to the mall past the kaleidoscopic garbage, looking at the trucks lining up with more, Thimme Gowda felt the stirrings of a deep anger. 

The mall where he worked, all glass and glitter, gilt and chrome. Gowda worked in a restaurant at the food court, cutting vegetables and washing dishes. Srinivas formerly of the village himself, had got him the job.  Entirely self-taught, something of a prodigy, he was one who gazed into long distances. Srinivas now lived in a tenement in the city, surrounded by books of every description, owned a smartphone and generally acted as interpreter in chief for all the strange phenomenon people like Thimme Gowda wondered at.  He spoke English and even sang a few English songs occasionally.  A sample:

Why people ordered food they barely ate (Because they can, and to keep you hungry). How their clothes were so impossibly clean (to blacken your water). Why their faces were so feverish and distorted, eyes so hungry. . .  (Constant dissatisfaction and perpetual satiation. . . )Is he deep? Thimme Gowda wondered sometimes. 

That day something different happened. Thimme Gowda was slicing and dicing, as usual, one eye on the unwashed dishes, calculating exactly when to make the switch from the cutting boards to the sink so as not to arouse the anger of the manager, when the PA system started blaring loud music with a heavy beat.  His eyes sought Srinivas who walked out and looked around.  Flash mob boss said Srinivas knowledgably. What’s that asked Thimme Gowda. A group of people show up suddenly and Dance said Srinivas. . . Sometimes to protest something…

The Manager allowed them to go out for a few minutes, his daughter was dancing.  Thimme Gowda saw the perfect choreography, the wide smiles, he heard the loud whooping, people with children dancing in the periphery, cell phones were everywhere, and a TV crew stood waiting, bodies moving spasmodically to the music. Yaake asked Thimme Gowda of Srinivas. 

Srinivas gazed intently.  Shaking his head, he looked at Thimme Gowda, started to speak, stopped, gazed at the dancers, looked at Thimme Gowda and shook his head again.  You look he started to say, looking down.  You look but you don’t see…. Thimme Gowda noticed Srinivas was trembling . Can you. . .  began Srinivas and trailed off again,he looked at the dancers and turned towards Thimme Gowda once more. Do you remember the Yakshagana Srinivas asked him,do you remember the drums ,do you?Srinivas thought of the entire village dancing beneath the moon ,by the kere which was pristine and clear with fish and frogs and snakes and birds. All night in waves of frenzy and ecstacy with no choreography but hearts beating in perfect time to each other. 

Look at them said Srinivas, these are the substitutes of you and me. We had Yakshas they have fashion.  Fashion tosses them their style, their expression, their conversation, dances, tunes. Here today and gone tomorrow.  They don’t have plays that last all night, they’ve no song in their hearts, no songs that they sing with their grandparents.  They have last month’s super hit. 

Why are they dancing? Asked ThimmeGowda. Some flyover in their city, trees will be cut they say said Srinivas. An image flashed across Thimme Gowdas mind.  Of the village with its blackwater kere, its children with tumours, the garbage mountains, Govindappa…Maybe they can dance for us he said

For us? Srinivas spat in a corner: That’s as revolutionary as I can get he said. 

The sun finally rose on Thimme Gowda. His inarticulate rage found form at last and he knew with utter certainty its mode of expression.  The revelation made him dizzy, and he clutched at Srinivas briefly.  Come to the village he said, I have an idea. Srinivas and Thimme Gowda had grown up together . In a world full of little joys there was nothing that they did not have the time for.  When the land was fertile and the water pure. 

Srinivas knew that look in the Gowdas eye.  For all the acumen and knowledge of Srinivas, Thimme Gowda was the one they looked up to when they were boys.  There was something in him, about him and around him that everybody saw plainly. So, when he said Come, Srinivas went. 

They squatted together the next morning.  The garbage emitted jets of steam, the dogs turning feral by the day fought over something looking suspiciously like a human limb.  Even the sun seemed to have abdicated and was covered in a grey veil. . . 

They came six years ago began Govindappa, they came with smiles and money, promises and drawings none of us understood.  They had all heard Govindas ruminations a hundred times before, but nobody interrupted the Old Man. If nothing else it served to loosen turgid bowels. 

They said that they were there to turn garbage into gold, gold for us all.  Our fields would thrive, there would be roads, gardens, and food in every house.  They showed us films on their computers, of villagers smiling, dancing singing . They showed us tidy factories, people in white coats and face masks, gloves. 

They talked and promised cajoled and wheedled.  Their pieces of paper got signed in the end, every last bit.  Then they disappeared, sending the trucks in their stead.  All night and all day.  Trash, the likes of which we never even knew existed.  Instead of the factory we got bulldozers and police.  You signed, you signed was all we heard. 

Strange words started populating our imagination. . . Tumour,TB, Chikungunya, Dengue, Psorioasis, Scabies, Cancer. Every few months we learnt a new one. Our land was poisoned. The kere was killed. And now we start to die terrible deaths one by one. Nothing we can do,we are this-with his customary gesture gesture downwards. 

Thimme Gowda spoke then.  I have a plan he said and before anybody could interrupt he outlined it for them . They listened in silence.  When he had finished, nobody said anything.  You want to do something, you want to fight the fight.  Began Thimme Gowda…wondering if they thought him mad. 

Govindappa drew mightily on his beedi, a sign that a pronouncement of some kind was forthcoming.  With this I won’t be Old anymore he said and smiled, every line on his face deepening. He looked like a shattered windscreen.  Cognizant of being an Elder and expected to say more, After all you can only give what you have he said. 

Nagegowdanpalya, Rachanamada, Thatgupe, Somanahalli…they could all participate said Srinivas, throwing a stone at a ravenous pig that had approached too close.  Flash Mob Hali style boss.  Let Govindappa and the Gowda enlist them, I will work out the logisitics,the when and where. It has to be before the Vidhan Soudha said Thimme Gowda. We can attack elsewhere later, let no one be spared he said.  Who should participate was the next question, every male child or adult was agreed, no women this time. 

The next three days the three of them, Govndappa, Thimme Gowda and Srinivas walked around the villages talking to people.  Words floated towards them on the wind and no matter whom they spoke to, they always seemed to say the right thing.  The flash mob was swelling, pulsing, seething like the abscess their villages had become.  Rooted in the land, nourished by it, drawing sustenance from it, its desecration seemed to have found an identical anguish in them all.  I did not think that so many would be ready said Thimme Gowda to Srinivas. Its called desperation said Srinivas, We will be the messengers of our grief.  Let who listens, listen said Govindappa now transformed with enthusiasm and passion into the man he once was. 

Rangappa who ran a bus service offered to ferry them to the outskirts from where they would walk in small groups so as not to attract attention.  A few would walk all the way.  The poets sat with Srinivas and prepared the declaration to be displayed. 

The night before, they had a feast. Govindappa and a few more elders went around exhorting everyone to eat well.  There was music and dancing with the garbage heaps silhouetted by the city lights providing a backdrop. 

Well before the dawn, farmers and farmers children, they stirred awake.  The edge of the highway was where they would all meet.  When he saw the people, Thimme Gowda was astounded.  It looked like a rally he told Srinivas. Maybe it is said Srinivas. Opa Halli Style he said riding an imaginary horse and chuckling to a joke only he seemed to understand. 

They congregated from different directions, just opposite the Vidhana Soudha around Cubbon Park. Srinivas had divided them all into smaller groups each of which signaled Srinivas of their arrival via their phones.  All was ready . Srinivas signaled the drummers who commenced a ferocious beat.  Suddenly the road in front of the Vidhana Soudha was awash with people, Govindappa in starched dhoti and shirt at the forefront.  A few morning walkers looked at them, somewhat bemused. There was no perceptible signal, no sign no sound. Govindappa whipped his dhoti off and squatted.  As a stone dropped in water the ripple spread outwards and with the drums beating frenetically all thirty thousand squatted.  Boom boom boom went their bowels and the all their angst and anger found thunderous release . From ragi brown to golden yellow, pale white to bloody black as a newspaper later described it. It was swift ,mostly silent and deadly. 

As suddenly as they arrived, they were gone.  A lone sign was planted in the grass:

Who are we? We are the ones you do not see. 

Epilogue :( From the dispatches of a journalist). 

“The bizarre flash mob style protest that occurred a few weeks ago in the city of Bangalore has now assumed a life of its own.  What started as an expression of helplessness by a few disgruntled villages around the city has now mysteriously morphed into a beast of popular dissent.  The long neglected underbelly of Indian society, invisible for years has found a unique voice.  A voice that transcends language, religion, caste and state boundaries.  The bastions of power and privilege, malls, gated communities, secretariats, the boulevards of the privileged are increasingly targets of their ire. Largely invisible, the average urban mind preoccupied with money and entertainment has long lost the ability to notice these people, they materialize and vanish into the air.  Train loads of shitters cross interstate boundaries.  Some talk of a leader, believed to be the organizer of the initial protest ….  Of a latter day Gandhi.  One thing is for sure, nothing has captivated millions of the poor in a similar manner in a long long time.  At the time of going to press, there are clear signs that sympathizers abound for the silent rage in display all over the country. Students, poets and the desperate urban poor appear to be joining the movement in substantial numbers.  In Nasik there is believed to be evidence of the entire lower rung of the police force actually participating actively with the protesters.  Reliable sources say the Government has abandoned plans of calling out the army fearing similar behavior…. . Meanwhile garbage collectors have either joined the shitters or are refusing to clean up the mess.  Internet humor calls it a Scatyagraha. Gandhi 2. 0……. . ”

You did well Gowdre said Govindappa. Now let what will happen, happen. 

 

