From: Bedartha Goswami<bedartha@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Deka Luit
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

On the morning of 12 August 2014, Guwahati woke up to find a huge rain tree standing in the middle of the Chandmari intersection, at the base of the flyover, where it meets the GNB Road going to Bamunimaidan. The tree was over twelve metres tall and had big overarching branches that spanned more than six to seven metres from side to side diametrically at points. Had it been by the side of the road, it would not have made the news; that would have been its rightful place until it was eventually cut down for some or the other brick-and-cement work. But to be standing right in the middle of the road, and at one of the busiest points of the city’s traffic was an outrage, especially on a Tuesday. A few hours after it was discovered there at five in the morning, news reporters and photographers started to pour in. They parked their motorbikes near the Chandmari bus stop, which was out of order due to the craziness, and they started recording their stories. The police showed up much later, only in the afternoon, to investigate the problem. They were unmoved by the placard nailed to the tree’s trunk saying, “মই ক’ত যাওঁ?” in Assamese, which meant, “Where do I go?”

The incident created a bizarre, surrealistic photo opportunity. When I saw its picture on the front page of The Assam Tribune, I was impressed by the size of the tree, stretching up to the buildings around it, dwarfing the intersection in its shade, and I was taken aback by its roots, those serpentine, lost limbs that wound upon themselves and entwined into each other, a tortured labyrinth ill at ease on the potholed tar filled road it was forcefully rooted to, against its will. It looked perverse, standing there alone, a misfit in the concrete, right where the traffic signal used to be. A few days later, we learned that a group of miscreants had uprooted the tree from the river bank in Kharghuli, and had transported it in the middle of the night, and had thereafter drilled a hole at the intersection to put the tree there. They evidently wanted to cause public disturbance, but any ulterior long term intentions were still unknown, as were their identities. The city authorities promptly filed a case against the unknown perpetrators and the police were duly handed the task of finding and apprehending them.

In the first week of October, a three-part aquarium was seen on top of a billboard visible from the Ulubari flyover, especially if you were going towards Dispur. The three tanks were filled with dirty, brown water, and it was hard to see anything inside them. The aquarium was hung in front of the billboard, and on the billboard itself, spray painted over the face of the smiling girl holding a mobile phone, were three words: Bharalu, Deepor Bil, and Brahmaputra. Bharalu is the drain-like rivulet which flows from somewhere beyond Zoo Road as far as I know. It takes a left turn near Jonali Path towards GS Road, and I am guessing then takes a right somewhere because it emerges again on to the cityscape at Bharalumukh (literally, the mouth of the Bharalu) where it empties out in to the Brahmaputra. Deepor Bil is an enormous lake that falls on the way from the airport to the city, but only if you take the road which bypasses the city-bypass highway, and travel along the southern and eastern periphery of the lake. It used to famously attract migratory birds and lovers from the city at one point of time. The Brahmaputra, of course, needs no introduction. Suffice it to say that it is as wide as it is treacherous and as deep as it is unfathomable. We are all quite scared of it, as it continues to devour several people each year. The three names on the billboard had arrows that pointed to each of the three tanks, indicating the source of the water. It did not make much of a difference though, as they all looked the same. Filth is filth. It has no gradations.

Other such incidents followed. There was the time when people in Kahilipara woke up to find coconut saplings by their gates. One other evening, the residents of Rehabari found live beehives hanging from the street lights, with honey dripping from the nests into glass jars placed precisely underneath. Then there was the time when over five hundred rose plants were reported from all the high schools, tiny rose saplings enclosed in sealed glass boxes in various states of decay. Each box had a label stating the cause of the rose’s impending death: it had been living by the side of such-and-such busy city road for the past two weeks. Each school had received around twenty roses, typically hung from a place where they could be easily seen. Besides the label, the same information was also spray painted on a wall near the rose. Yet another time, billboards all over the city were replaced with a two-frame poster featuring aerial shots of Guwahati: the one on the left taken in 1990, and the one on the right in 2010. Everyone could see how the city had become brown, grey, and naked in two decades. News agencies reported that a total of two hundred and thirty-three billboards had to be reprinted and reinstated. I didn’t even know till then that we had so many.

However, the one that was my favourite, and by far the most surreal, were the bougainvilleas on Zoo Road. On the dry, wintry morning of 16 January 2015, while going to work, I found out, along with thousands of other Guwahati residents, that the entirety of Zoo Road, from Ganeshguri signal to Tiniali, was covered in an arch of bougainvilleas. Bamboo poles had been erected on both sides of the road, on the support of which slender bamboo grates had been hung overhead, all throughout the stretch of the road, and on these rested the bougainvilleas, a good truck’s height above the road. As with the rain tree, the bougainvilleas were drilled and ‘planted’ overnight into the roadside. At first, I presumed that it was perhaps someone’s wedding, but Naina from Mirchi FM informed me otherwise: “the environmental terrorists had struck again”, she said. I turned my car around once at Tiniali and another time at Ganeshguri, and again at Tiniali, and once more at Ganeshguri, and I went round and round the shaded Zoo Road.

The response to these acts were diverse. While on one extreme, there were many people who came out in their support, on Facebook, on Twitter, in the papers, on TV shows, and in private conversation, hailing these incidents as a coming of age of the resistance to unbridled, unscrupulous growth; on the other extreme, there were voices that decried these events as acts of violence and terror, targeted at disrupting the machinery of our society, and standing in clear opposition to the directives of progress and harmony and liberty and brotherhood. The All Assam Students Union, and several other students’ organisations along with it, coordinated demonstrations and marches condoning the ডেকা লুইত [transliteration: ‘Deka Luit’] movement, as the media was calling it by that time. Deka Luit means the “young Luit” or the “young Brahmaputra” — a play on the more common “Burha Luit” meaning “old Brahmaputra” and I don’t think anyone really knew who first coined that term or why, even though it was for sure that nobody knew the age or origin of the perpetrators. The larger political parties of the region, the BJP and the AGP, maintained a persistent, non-committal stance on the issue and were rarely available for comment. They were waiting it out to see which way the wind would blow eventually. Playing it safe was the best strategy in a pre-election year. The ruling Congress-led government tried to spin a road of moderation, stating categorically that even though they were committed to preserving the rich natural heritage of Assam, such efforts could not disregard the sanctity of public spaces. Wild, unconstitutional means of creating a public mania around any issue was not encouraged and would not be tolerated in their purview. What this essentially meant was that they would hunt down the people responsible. A timid fifth page report in The Sentinel on March 3 quietly clarified that the “unidentified person(s) and/or organisation(s) responsible for the acts attributed by the media to the so-called Deka Luit were deemed unconstitutional and that they, and their activities, were here on after, banned [by the state]”. Following this, it was a throwback to the nineties, when the ULFA was in full spate, when we had checkpoints at every couple of kilometres, when young men could not gather in public in groups larger than three, when men driving two-wheelers could have at the most their wives and kids in the pillion seat and no one else, especially not another man, and when you had to make sure that all your papers were in order at the checkpoints, or else you had to be prepared to shell out an easy 500 as a bribe. It was not that strange actually, most people in the government already knew the drill, as did most of us in the common masses, but even then, it brought about an uneasy sense of déjà vu, to be suddenly reminded of our childhoods, which resurfaced in those six to eight months of military presence in Guwahati.

During this time, the occasional column pieces in The Assam Tribune written by Parbôti Phukan, a thirty-four year old Assistant Professor of Ecology at Tezpur University, kept me anchored to a sense of sensibility. His was the only rational, comforting voice of solace in the sea of bipolar, chaotic, and inflammatory screams. He tried to diligently decode the acts of ‘environmental terrorism’ and the message they conveyed. Without supporting the Deka Luit in and of themselves, he provided his readers with a much needed and largely missing context: how much deforestation had occurred since the 80s, how much power a shopping mall used and wasted, how pollution had increased over the decades, how the rivers had become dirtier, how flood induced devastation could be avoided, how climate change was real, how bees and butterflies and frogs were essential to our ecosystem and how we were wiping them out. His pieces reminded me of how we had relegated nature to the margins. He constantly tried to walk a fine line between arguing for the broader case of environmental awareness sparked off by the Deka Luit, while at the same time decrying their acts themselves as illegal. This nuance was, unsurprisingly, lost on many. His columns were inevitably followed by a torrent of letters to the editor, accusing Phukan of being part of the terrorist organisation, of condoning violence, and of betraying the national narrative. Several local organisations got together and filed a PIL against him as well. Then one day in August 2015, nearly a year after the first rain tree incident, he was confronted outside his office by a group of four men who, after a brief altercation about his scooter not being parked properly, beat him up so badly that he was hospitalised for six weeks. Since then, he has not written a single word. And since his assailants were ordinary people with papers in order, they were able to pass through the security checks in the city unnoticed.

At the end, I think the point of all that security was not so much to capture the Deka Luit, but to prevent them from creating more art. And I have to concede that the authorities did succeed in doing so, at least in part. There were no more dying roses, dirty river water tanks, spray painted billboards, or beautiful bougainvillea avenues. All that remained was a cacophony of opportunists cashing in on the sudden attention that the media, and consequently the public, gave to environmental issues. There were dharnas, protests, campaigns, marches, morchas, and so much more that did not amount to anything. It is hard to remember now a single sensible voice from their midst, except the one that vanished quietly into oblivion. My only indelible memory from that time is when I drove through Zoo Road again and again, under the shade of pink bougainvilleas. 

