From: Koundinya Ayyagari<koundinya1990@gmail.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Mulla
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

I met Mulla first in the year two thousand and six. I was in my class ten then. At around nine in the morning, I passed out in the school assembly for the third time that week. After fainting once, mom made sure I didn't skip my breakfast. Nevertheless, it started with same tingling feeling in my legs but only a little later. I survived all three prayer-songs and managed to the Lord’s Prayer.

Our Father in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Your kingdom come, your will be done, on earth as… I fell, this time to the left, into the girls line.

Yash and Nitin helped me to classroom. They were happy to have escaped half the assembly thrice in a week and some of that happiness manifested into ostentatious concern. Nitin put his hand around my waist and I was too weak to express my contempt for his gesture. I resigned, accepted the damsel in distress situation, and let him take me through the snaky isle to my seat. A sense of lost dignity enervated me.

Mrs. Francina, my class teacher entered, gave Vikas her cabinet keys and walked out. He took a chocolate bar out of her cabinet, tore open the wrapper and offered it to me. I refused. The sight of the dark brown bar made me nauseous and I was afraid I would puke.

Yet they kept insisting. Their hands felt heavy and their grip pained my shoulders. Their faces were grossly magnified. One of them had terrible body odor, or may be it was mine. I thought I would pass out again. I almost did when from behind came a voice.

“It’s not the sugar level. It may be dehydration. Move away from him. He needs air. If possible get ORS from the school medical.”

After they left, I drank more water. The silence soothed me. I mustered some energy and turned to thank whoever it was.

Through my blurred vision, I saw a thin boy with enormous head and ruffled hair that had a faint golden glow. He was gazing out of the window, into the bright sky, with one end of a pen in his mouth.

“Thank you.” I said.

He turned, smiled politely, and said nothing. I slept for some time.

The first period was English literature. Mrs. Francina warned me that fainting thrice in a week is not normal and said I could go home if I wanted. I didn’t. After a lot of free advice on beating the heat, she introduced Mulla to the class. The class gave a warm welcome to ‘Aditya Mullapudi'.

Next one hour she spoke what even Tolstoy wouldn’t have known about his short story The Imp and the Crust.

During the evening recess, I ran into Mulla.

“You fainted thrice this week?” he asked.

I was about to smile and shrug it off like I did all that day. Everyone offered some kind of sympathy that in its undertone sounded “you pitiful weakling”, but it was different with him. It was more curiosity than sympathy. A devilish desire for detail in his eyes made me reply.

“Yes.” I answered.

“You had breakfast each time?”

“Not on Monday, but today and the day before, yes.”

He nodded pensively.

“Teacher’s right. You should see a doctor. Just in case.”

That evening I went to a doctor. I got a MRI scan and a slew of other tests done. All reports came out normal.

Days passed. Mulla made no friends and seldom interacted with anyone. His outstanding test scores earned him the reputation of a studious bore. Yet there was something ineffably interesting in him that I couldn’t ignore.

Finally, in one Maths period came the moment when my Coordinate geometry and his Arithmetic forged our friendship.

On the black board, four points on an inclined line divided it into three parts whose distances, teacher said, were in arithmetic progression. After asking us to calculate the abscissa of one point and the ordinate of another, he went out.

The data given was insufficient to obtain the line’s slope or compute the distances, and all were stuck there. Small clusters formed everywhere and the discussions went on in full flow.

I turned back and found Mulla staring at the diagram he drew. It was shabby but was marked with all the data given.

After staring with him for a while, I said, more to myself

“If only we can project the line on X-axis! But we don’t have theta.”

“Of course… Brilliant!” he interjected.

“Co-secant theta is of course a constant for any straight line. Now when an arithmetic progression is multiplied with a constant...”

“It remains an arithmetic progression.” I completed.

“Bang on.” he said.

“That means the X coordinates are in arithmetic progression.” I continued.

“Precisely!”

I began calculating the abscissa in one corner of his copy while he transformed Euclid’s formula and readied it for substitution. In few seconds we had all the coordinates.

“You solved it.” I said.

“Yes, we did.” he replied, for the first time with a wholehearted smile.

Teacher entered and the class fell silent.

"Could anyone solve it?" he asked.

No one answered.

"Not even one?"

Still no answer.

I didn’t answer because Mulla didn’t. Lot many oohs and aahs filled the room as he wrote the solution on the board and arrived at the exact same answers we got. Later I asked Mulla why he didn't raise his hand.

“It was unnecessary.” He said curtly.

I didn't believe him. I thought he was shy, or afraid, or both. How utterly wrong I was!

On that day he befriend me. In time we got to know each other. He studied in London till he was nine. His parents died in a car accident caused by a landslide. He came to India after that and lived with his grandparents. He wanted no sympathy and I gave him none.

My class branded me as Mulla’s friend. Some of my old mates felt I was a traitor. I didn’t care. Mulla amazed me. To me, he was this super-big line without which one would never realise that the original is so damn small.

When he came to know that I played chess, he asked what my favorite opening was. “What is an opening?” I asked. Then he taught me King’s Indian defence. We played chess in Moral Science and S.U.P.W. periods on our copies. Every move required drawing a new eight by eight matrix and our copies were passed back and forth.

It was in one Moral Science period that this happened. Christina madam was our class’s favorite. She was the only one was friendly with us. The lesson started. I and Mulla were playing chess. It was my turn, but because at one point she looked at me, I started listening.

“... and God is kind, He will never desert his believers. Now we all believe in God, who doesn’t! So we need not worr... What?” she was looking in my direction.

When I turned back, I saw Mulla’s hand high up. She asked if he wanted to go to the toilet. The class laughed.

“No mam, you asked who doesn’t believe in God.”

Firstly, though we knew not then that such a question existed, it was rhetorical. Everyone thought it silly. The whole class laughed. Mam laughed.

“Sit down.” she said and continued her lesson. The recess bell went.

“You really don’t believe in God?” I asked

“No. Do you?”

“I don’t know. We can’t say, right? What if tomorrow God appears to me and says ‘Here I am’!”

He paused for a second, shook his head, and said

“What if tomorrow a pig comes to our class and teaches English? So why don’t you believe NOW that pigs can teach English?”

I laughed. He didn’t. That day’s chess game ended in a draw which for me was as good as winning. I went home happy.

Mrs. Francina was late to class the next morning. When she entered, her face was grave and her walk furious.

She placed her bag on the table and said “You. Stand up.”, pointing her finger to Mulla, and before he could stand, she began shouting.

“I couldn’t lift my head in the staff-room. Every teacher was shocked. MY class’s student! Do you think you are a hero because you scores are high? Let me tell you this, I don’t care what your marks are if you have a character like this!”

Mulla was silent.

“Do you think we are fools? Go to the staff-room and apologize to everyone. Only then you will be allowed here. Move the dustbin from its place when you are back and kneel down there.”

He stood still, looking confused.

“Are you deaf! I said ‘Out’!”

“Apologize for what mam?” he asked politely.

“What guts to answer me back! You think you are above our Lord, the almighty? It’s his grace you have bread to eat and cloth to wear! Now get lost before I drag you out by your tie!”

“I am sorry. I won’t apologize to any one for that.”

Mrs. Francina ran to his bench, slapped, hauled and pushed him out of the isle. He stumbled, took support of her table, and stood. As he turned, I saw his check burning red with her finger marks distinctly visible on his pale skin. Not a single drop of tear came out of his eyes. She threw his bag which flew in the air and landed with a heavy thud.

She would have taken him out like a dogcatcher dragging his dog had not Beena mam appeared in the corridor. Seeing her walk by, Mrs. Francina calmed down a little. After mam crossed the second window and walked away, she continued,

“Go home and come along with your grandfather. I will let him know what rubbish his grandson speaks.”

“Grandpa also does not believe in god.” he said, looking right into her eyes and in a manner so bold that she stood speechless for a moment.

Her eyes reddened by rage, her fists clenched, she spoke as if she spit those words on him

“No wonder he suffered the wrath of the Lord!”

Only Mulla and I understood what she meant. No one else knew about his parents. Mulla stood there dumbfounded, as if a bomb exploded in front of him. A thin teary layer formed in his eyes. Was it anger, or pity, or sorrow, I couldn’t tell, but in a trembling soft voice he said, “How stupid you are.”

The class was shocked. The silence in the room was never more scarier. Mrs. Francina took her bag and walked to the door.

“Only one of us will be in this class. You people decide. I will sit in the principal’s office till then.”

The whole class stared at him after she left. No one knew what to do. I was tensed and drenched in sweat. I couldn’t bear the sight of him kneeling and picking the copies that fell out of his bag, and the frontbenchers lifting their legs to let him take his books from below. I went under the bench, closed my mouth, and cried.

I heard heavy footsteps of our principal and the sound of Mulla being dragged out. Before I got up he was gone. He was expelled from the school that very day.

Seven years later, I was standing in front of a notice board with a map of Massachusetts Institute of Technology, searching for the auditorium when from behind came the voice “Wanna play chess tonight?”

He won. After the game, as we sipped our Glenfiddich, I told Mulla that he was wrong about one thing back then. After all, Mrs. Francina taught us English. 

