From: Runa Mukherjee<cleo.runa@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Storm in a Tea Cup
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

It was yet another day in the universe Vijay had now come to know so closely. With a steaming cup of black tea wrapped around his fingers, he tried to decipher what today’s discussion was all about. Yet another young girl had been cruelly raped and killed, another family had lost their girl child and dignity to a set of monsters that had not been told what the meaning of a fair world was. He read the details and felt his pressure rise. The blood running in his body boiled even before reaching a hundred degrees Celsius. The vein in his temple that throbbed much before anything else in his body usually did was already doing so. The thought of another girl losing her life after being sexually assaulted made him angry, as if it was his own body that had been humiliated. As the minutes passed, people after people roared; some annoyed that the government had still not formed a policy that would put these heinous criminals behind bars, some pissed that castration was still not being given its due position in the legal framework of the country. Some smirked, citing how nothing had been done after the last few rapes. Vijay felt his body go through a horrid allergic reaction as each pore burst into a raw sore every time he read a new opinion. Furious with the very air he breathed, he stormed down on the letters, tearing down at his loathing in a feral manner. The tea cup, now empty, sat on the table and would have probably been unhappy if it had any feelings. After all, sipping tea didn’t excite Vijay as much as being angry at things did.

He stood up, walked till the fridge and took out the cheese. He then opened a drawer and extracted the toaster and had just put two slices of bread in it, when the beauty beeped. Forgetting to turn the knob of the toaster to a light and breezy level two, he rushed to see what the devil had to say. Army men were displeased with their pension plan formulated by the government. Bam! The tirade started. Nameless faces and faceless names swooped in, each with someone in the family who was an Army man. Some even without any Army background, but this was their countrymen being denied what was due to them. He felt that familiar heat rise in his body, the feeling which when not vented, could consume him wholly. He went through line after line, seething in the unfairness of it all, his dissent peaking. What could he do to counter all that annoyance? Make use of words of course.

So, he poured his heart out on the keyboard, treating each word like an angry stab. There, that was taken care of. When the toaster clanked, Vijay remembered with a jolt that he had put it there but had no recollection of his action. The two slices, dark brown by now, didn’t appeal to his appetite any longer. He put a cheese slice between them anyway and chomped it down.

Just as preoccupied, he picked a light blue shirt, a navy blue tie and black trousers for the day’s work, all the time checking on what the world had to say. So many of his brethren had agreed with him about how the government had to come clean when it came to their soldiers. After all, they had unanimously voted a soldier’s work as the purest in any nation.

Driving to work, he listened to the radio as the topic reached its peak with an old pensioner revealing some dark facts about the ruling government’s ways. Processing what he just heard, Vijay’s mind tuned out the honking cars and snarling traffic and went to a place full of white noise, somewhere in the back benches of his mind palace. Like a factory that goes on strike, the shutters were pulled down and workers were protesting just outside the perimeter of his grey cells. Disturbed and diseased, he reached his office.

The man who sat next to him shared an important bit of news; today’s morning meeting was going to affect the entire company. Vijay smirked and declared nonchalantly that if it was anything that didn’t go with his principles, he would tell the authorities what he really felt or even put his foot down. His colleague, impressed by his conviction, murmured he would do the same. Vijay felt victorious for sounding more righteous than the man next to him.

As the morning meeting commenced, his boss and the managing director announced they had sold major 
