From: Vimi Bajaj <vimibajaj@hotmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: What's In A Name
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

It was raining outside. The theater was crowded with a mix of laughing and spent faces. Muddy footprints trailed the outer hallway. Sonali had wanted to come before but hadn’t ventured out to see a play since she was a college student. She had worked in a bank as a teller one summer when she was twenty, and used up all the money she had earned to go to the theater on the weekends. It had been her passion. And then the passion, like all hope, fizzled. She put away childish things, which made her mother smile more, because her mother could not stand to see her daughter alone. Plays and passions meant her daughter would be always alone because then she would have chosen to be cerebral. It was clear that that was not what her mother had wanted for her. So then all the nonsense started: the introductions, the matchmaking, the blind dates. She rejected all of them of course, after the first meetings. Only now it was different.

Now Sonali wanted nothing more than to sit and watch the play with Ashok, and to have a conversation afterwards over coffee. Perhaps she had been purposefully diffident, but she was always a romantic, and now at last she was also ready for what other people did in droves. She smiled as he held her hand in the dark.

The stage at the theater was set in a nineteenth century European scheme, she saw a samovar on a side table, a crisp white tablecloth underneath, a punch bowl filled with red liquid, a small couch with end tables, a back door along a makeshift wall. Looking again, the background was crude, stark like the dampened walls of a horse stable. It was realistic and she could almost smell the pungency of horse manure and wet earth. The posters outside and the still photographs in the display window had not done it justice, had not captured the playfulness of the set. If the stills had not captured the playfulness, it wasn’t because it wasn’t there. The photographs were not artful, they were media advertising. Art was always capable. She thought of the cave art and the pictures of prehistoric bison in her class’s textbooks. Art always captured the essential, and so it was here, on the stage, an unrecorded playfulness. She itched to take a picture with her camera.

The audience settled into their seats. The players came onstage. Sonali watched them, unrefined actors, features like gargoyles. They said the words, but there was no country charm, no languid pauses. They tore through the first act. Her favorite Chekhov play. She wanted to make a beeline toward the exit. What were they doing? Uncle Vanya without his vodka, without melancholy? Without the idleness, the heavy handedness. They were mishandling a masterpiece, diluting it with incompetence, the players emoting and showing off instead of playing it.

“Let’s go.”

“But it’s not even the intermission.”

“I don’t care. Let’s go.”

They stood and walked out, climbing over people’s laps. She had a feeling of having been personally slighted.

She was five feet ahead of him outside, walking fast.

“Wait!” he shouted, catching up with her. “What’s the matter with you?”

His words felt very natural to her and so did the vexation underneath. She had wanted sleepy Russians. How different this production was from her bookish vision.

They walked toward the Cafe Coffee Day down the street.

“Don’t ask me to explain myself.”

“There won’t be any explaining tonight.” He looked amused.

“I will not be explaining myself.” She was out of breath.

“You don’t have to.”

“How can they call themselves a professional acting troupe?”

“I liked the girl who played the young wife.”

She rolled her eyes and turned away.

“Hey,” he laughed. “I was just kidding.”

He ordered a cappuccino, she a cafe americano and a chutney sandwich.

“Let’s not talk about it,” she said as she took a bite. “I wanted to tell you more about my family.”

“What about them?”

“I think you deserve to know,” she said.

“Know what? What’s the mystery?”

“I have two sisters in the U.S.”

“Oh,” he said. “Startling news.”

“Well, it just never came up in conversation.” It had been ten years since their father had died. And ten years since her sisters’ last visit.

“I thought you should know. I know all about your background. That you’re the only child. That your father died when you were twenty two. That you like chum chums.” She laughed. He smiled and sipped his drink, wishing he could have a spongy sweet pink chum chum.

“What do you know about me? she asked.

“It’s too late to do anything now,” he mused, pointing to his engagement ring.

“It’s not too late,” she said, defiantly. “You can back out at any time. Don’t feel tied down.”

“I don’t,” he said softly, leaning forward.

“As I was saying,” she said. “I have two sisters living in the States.

Varsha’s the eldest, she’s married and has three kids in Chicago. Renu’s the youngest and she lives in New York.” Ashok listened closely, sipping his drink. “She just got divorced.”

“I’m sorry to hear that.”

“She made some bad choices.” They finished their coffees. The place was busy, the customers mostly twenty-somethings, casual, hip and engrossed in themselves. She noticed girls with nose rings and pink hair extensions, tattoos and Kolhapuri’s. The retro decor, with browns and burnt umbers and shaggy pillows on leather couches was a bit overdone. Instrumental music played in the background. Everywhere in India these days it seemed, bored kids were taking advantage of the changes that were happening, and places like these were overrun with them.

“So the older one with the kids lives in Chicago?”

“Like a Maharani,” she said, careful to hide what needed to be hidden, for now. That her eldest sister moved in a fog of depression, that she was unlikely to recover, that she had made allowances, that she had settled.

“She has an in-ground pool and a 1.3 acre lot.”

She looked at his face to see if it registered anything. It hadn’t, not in the way she had feared.

“That’s great,” he said.

“Not really,” she said. “They don’t have a very good marriage. I lived with them for a month.”

Why had she said that?

“That’s too bad.”

“He’s overbearing,” she said, speaking over him. “My sister’s not Mother Teresa either, in fact she’s a doormat.” She paused. “Don’t think I’ll ever be a doormat.”

She looked at him. His silence made her face flush at her own words.

“Damn boring place,” she said.

“U.S. is boring?”

“The suburbs are.”

“How about New York?”

“Never been,” she said, looking away. “My younger sister and I don’t talk.”

Why this? Why now?

“Let’s go,” he said. “I told your mother I’d have you home by ten.”

“My mother’s in love with you.”

“Check please.”

She’d embarrassed him. She was speaking too much and she knew it. But that was because she felt the need for explanations. Arranged marriage after all, was a contractual agreement. Best if all parties were transparent.

They stood up and walked past the twenty-somethings.

“My mother chose a name for you,” he said, when they had settled into the car.

“I have to get a new name?”

“You don’t have to use it.”

“What is it?”

“Usha.”

They sat in silence. He drove slowly, enjoying the sensation of having made a decision for someone other than himself. It was a new feeling.

“It’s ceremonial.” He glanced at her beside him. “It’s up to you.”

The lights from a truck shifted across his face. He had a smug look. He drove in silence, enjoying the sensation of having made a decision not only for himself, but for someone else, a new feeling.

“But it would really make me happy,” he said. He didn’t look at her. “It’s just a formality,” he said finally.

“I don’t think so.”

She still had a chance to back out, it occurred to her. But it was only a fleeting thought. She glanced at him. This was not the face of an unreasonable man. In fact, he was probably speaking someone else’s words, a good son, trying to get a feel for the ground. She was the smarter of the two, she sensed. He only wanted to please his mother. Soon he would want to please only her. 

