From: Rajshree Maurya<rajshreemauryal11@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Hope
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Anki listened to how her mumma was showering her with praises like 'you're a curse to this family', 'why were you born?' 

Anki was just a 8-year old. Her father was a daily wage labourer and mother was a housewife. They lived a poor life but were able to afford do waqt Ki roti. 

Anki studied at the local school, thanks to her right to education. She loved to read. She was one of the favourite students of teachers because of her top grades and attentiveness in class. Everything was going fine when one day Anki coughed up blood and fainted in class, this lead to the devastating truth of Anki suffering from cancer unfold. Her parents tried to do whatever they can for her treatment but all of it lead to nothing. They asked for loans but the unsure if they would be able to repay or not, most of them refused to lend money to them. At last, they gave it up on their fate. 

Anki's deteriorating health made her quit school. Her friends who visited bought her books, as they knew that she loved to read. Anki had heard about cancer survivors and wished to be one. When she told this to her parents they just smiled but internally cursed themselves because they couldn't do anything for their dying child. The doctors already confirmed that Anki had no chance of surviving now. 

Anki's mother due to sadness resorted to anger and started letting it out on her. Little Anki grew used to it and had only one conclusion that her parents hated her. 

This was one of those days. She just listened quietly to her mother when she saw her old book lying at the plastic chair. She decided to write something. She knew that she wanted to let her feelings out. Opening the book and picking up the pencil, she began to write: 

It was time for the boat makers to make a new boat. All the other boats were fine but a new addition wouldn't mean any harm. The boat makers were very keen on trying something new but the risks always pulled them back. They had a little extra time and money this time, so they decided to go for it this time. They designed a new boat. They never made such a boat before. 

The new boat had a soft bottom. It's bottom was made of thin layer of wood. The boat community considered the bottom of a boat as their heart. The new little boat was named 'Hope'. 

According to the boat community, a boat's bottom indicates how strong a boat is. A thick and hard bottom means a tough heart. Thus, Hope would have a fragile heart in their opinions. But Hope was brave, she herself thought. 

She displayed 'HOPE' written in black on her white colour in the top half. The bottom half was painted in navy blue. 

Hope was put into the water after she was made. Her first journey was due after a week. It would be to the nearest island. She was left there by the boat makers. 

When Hope was left there, she thought of how the boat community would greet her, how they will welcome her in the community. Little Hope was true to her name. She always hoped too much. 

The first night into the water was not like what she expected. All other boats thought that she was too small for her own good. Indeed Hope was the smallest of all the boats. They voiced their thoughts to her. "Oh! Your heart is so fragile. It'll drown you for I am sure." said one. "She, definitely, will not survive." said another. "Naming her Hope and thinking this might help. Pathetic!" said some. "Who is to be her mother?" asked one. 

The boat community had a rule that every boat should have a mother. The boats were given a mother whether they wanted it or not. This was only a tradition they followed, not caring the meaning of a mother. 

Hope thought 'I don't need a mother in such a community. They don't respect me. The boat makers are so kind. But my own kind is bad.' 

She was thinking this when one of the lady boats named 'StoneHeart' said "I would be her mother. She isn't likely to be surviving anyways. Why not be a mother for some days." She said this all in a sickly sweet voice. 

'A mother like that!' thought Hope 'A society like this? I don't deserve here. What did I do wrong.' 

Days were passing. StoneHeart said nothing encouraging to Hope for her first journey. Instead she always reminded her of her fragile heart and how it would drown her. The whole boat society was never encouraging. They thought Hope was a waste. They did not thought about her feelings. No one gave importance to it. Nobody understood her or tried to. 

In this community of hers where she should be encouraged for her journeys and be looked upon with respect, she was ignored. No love. She was given as much as importance as garbage would be given. 

'Maybe they'll respect me if I succeeded' thought Hope. But the problem was she doubted it. 

All the comments by her community was getting to her. She tried to not think of it. The mother was no help either. Hope was too much affected. 

Days passed. The day of the first journey came. Hope's makers came. She looked up at them as if she could convey her feelings to them. But of course they wouldn't be able to understand it. 

Her makers came towards her. They said,"She is small. Why did we even bother make her? She wouldn't be able to do it. Such a waste!" 

This hurt Hope to the core. She couldn't bear it. Her own makers thought so little of her. They didn't even have faith in her. 'They were the same as the boat community' she thought. 

Hope was settled on the start of her first journey. The island was a kilometer away. But Hope wasn't able to think of how she was going to do it. Without thinking she started to sail. 

The boat community started saying that she couldn't make it. She was a waste. Hope tried her best to get all these things out of her mind. But she couldn't. 

Her mind was jumbling with all those mean things said to her. Her heart, which she thought as her strength was getting heavier. 

The mean thoughts, the discouragement, the community's distaste towards her in the air, Hope's makers comments were getting in her mind. She completed half the distance. 

Hope continued. She continued with all her might. 

She was just a few meters away from her destination, few meters from success, when all the thoughts, comments and opinions came rushing towards her. Hope couldn't bear it anymore. Her fragile heart shattered. Hope started drowning. 

Everyone started laughing at her. No one tried to help her. Everyone thought how true their opinion was. But what they didn't understand was that the little Hope was affected by their opinions on her. No one was trying to understand how their words affected the little Hope's life. They were enjoying the show. 

Seeing everybody's face, listening to their laughing, Hope thought 'If only they understood my little heart's big hope.' 

With each second she was sinking. And then My Hope drowned. My little hope is no more. She is now lying on the deep surface of the sea where no one could help her. She's never going to get up. She's gone. 

With the last word Anki's soul, too, left her body. Her mother, when noticed Anki's still body, let the plate fall which was in her hands. She let out a wailing cry. The neighbours rushed in when they heard the sound. They saw Anki's body in her mother's arms. She was crying. Someone ran to fetch Anki's father. 

When Anki's father came and saw Anki's body he couldn't believe his eyes. From the time he was informed and before entering his house, he hoped that everything he heard was a lie and his Anki would smile up at him. But this was the truth, Anki was no more. Everybody present in the room knew that Anki's death was the inevitable truth but it didn't make her death any less painful. 

After the cremation ceremony, when both of the now childless-parents, returned and saw Anki's last written words they rushed to their neighbour's house. They asked their neighbour's daughter to help them understand what Anki had written. When she read and translated the story to them, Anki's mother's eyes went wide and the only thought which crossed her mind was 'What actually killed my daughter?' 

