From: Rudra Narayan<rudranarayan1002@gmail.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: The 'Child' of all Dissent
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

“He is refusing to come out in the open.”

The woman cried nervously.

“What? How is that possible? Does he even know what he is saying? Should I call 911?”

The man replied even more nervously.

“911? Are we in some American sitcom?”

The woman was now losing her patience.

“Stop watching these ‘seasons’ and become real. This is India. Call our neighbour Bhalla ji. Go quickly.”

“Sure honey.”

“And please stop this honey business. Be a man!”

Bhalla ji came, half naked and fully drunk. His shorts were ending somewhere near his groin and he was wearing a fluorescent coloured t-shirt which should ideally now fit his embryo and which said ‘Just do It’. The sexual connotation of which was running in his mind. He came with Mrs. Bhalla who was born to be, forever, Mrs. Bhalla.

“One glass of whiskey and I am happy. Three Patiala and I am high. Five and I am over Mrs Bhalla.” That’s how he marked his presence. Looking at Mrs Bhalla it was difficult to imagine her under anybody. A mountainous mass of tissue, nerves, fat and muscle, landscaped by gold jewellery hung in every possibly corner. Branded red track pants, red t-shirt and sneakers that made her look like a walking talking online shop. Red, overheated market enthusiasm, forever on sale.

“Oye bête ji whatisthematterwithyou?”

His words were mixed and the quintessential Punjabi quality of making the most innocent words seem like the most abusive expression was intact. He continued, “You cannot live in that dark chamber for long. Pehendi… You will die beta ji”.

Mrs Bhalla added her own wisdom, “Come beta ji, online sales bonanza is on. Maha-sales. Blockbuster. The bazaar is buzzing. Come out and buy. There is something for everyone and at every price for any situation. Don’t miss the offer.”

She completed the greedy tagline.

“No,” cried the voice.

“I don’t want to be in a place where empty stomachs are fed with mouthful of promises. Where everything has a price and can be sold and bought. Do one thing uncle aunty, please sell your greed a bit and buy some humility. I am not coming out before you achieve this.”

“Gyan, shyan and all, huh! This child is a waste,” Mrs. Bhalla concluded disapprovingly and turned towards her husband.

Mr. Bhalla by that time was happily dozed off.

“*Just do it*. My foot!” she sighed.

For years she had lived her life with this alcoholic. For years she had been a forced sexual agnostic. And that is why she bought happiness online, ordered it with a written guarantee of return. Mrs. Bhalla was living her life one redeemable coupon after another.

The mother repeated her words again, “No, this one will not come out. My child, I know. There is a little bit of me there. I have been silenced by time and circumstance. This one is a rebel. I have nurtured this rebellion in my child by my own silence. He will not come out.”

“Hey! Listen boy. This is father”.

A voice boomed. The honey had vanished. Replaced by a baritone, confirming authority.

“What have we done to deserve this? Aren’t you concerned about your future, career, money, family? Your friends will run you over. By locking yourself in this darkness you are accepting your defeat. Don’t you care about our family? Our honour? What will the neighbour’s say? How will society perceive us?”

“Ah!” The voice came from inside.

“Family, honour, neighbours and society. Name, place, animal and things. Just games dad. That you guys play. At the end of every game there is a winner and a loser. At the end of every game the sheet of paper is crumpled and thrown into the dustbin. To be recycled again, with some new participants, some new victors and losers. You adults really play games, forever.”

“I think I have to call the priest. This one is possessed.”

Father solicited the Holy Father now.

Promptly, the family priest came with a bag load of opium.

“My child refuses to come out holy man? Will I have to bear this pain for the rest of my life?”

The woman was clearly troubled.

“Devil has taken over,” he declared.

“But don’t worry I am here. Both of you just swallow this opium and I will take care of everything.”

The holy man clearly knew what religion was to the masses.

And lo and behold, sufficiently opium-ated the man and woman were now in delirium, blabbering praises for everything and everyone. They now seemed settled in this chaos.

Opium whatsapp-ed religion and added god to the group. Reason exited.

“Get out, you bloody devil,” roared the holy man.

“And what will you do to me once I get out,” the child roared back.

“You will ask me to pray and kill those who don’t. You will ask me to eat this and not eat that. You will force me to fast and then feast. You will put a sword in my hand and ask me to bay for blood. You will then ask me to conveniently confess and then kill again. I am now scared with your God. Your books make me shiver. Your deities terrify me. Your hymns are noisy. Your rituals are greedy. Your God is a stranger to me. For me your god is the biggest blasphemy to God.”

“This child is a heresy,” the holy man shouted, “We should bring him to his cross sooner.”

Silently, his spine became jelly. He was now in pure agony.

He was in a fever of his faith but the child’s words were making him freeze. He saw his stock of opium shrinking suddenly. The father and mother now regaining consciousness. And they had a few questions in their mind.

The holy man sensed it and declared, “Devil has entered your household, cleansing is required.”

“But faith can only provide a prescription. This has to be dealt with ‘surgically’. Call the State.”

State was the confectionari-sing force. Sweet, powerful and irresistible.

The child’s confidence was now shaken. Dissent mellowed, but not gone yet.

“It is nice and warm here. Though a bit dark yet I am and can manage. Food should not be a problem. Fine, that I will not grow and compete. Fine, that I will not run but here I am swimming in my own world which is finite and protected. I know the boundaries and they don’t bother me. I do not want to live in a limitless expansive world of unknown opportunities and known dangers.”

The heels of boots could now be heard. State had started its march. Precise and regimented. Authority was macabre.

Opium perspired. And the mother was sobbing now.

“What was the need to call State? Is my child a State threat? Can’t he just choose not to come out?”

The father feigned helplessness. He continued begging for some opium. Intoxication would suspend his anxiety for a while. The holy man took out some pages from his holy book and took out some more opium. Alchemy of subjugation was ensured. The father went off to sleep.

Child’s dissent was now viral. It was streaming and news channels were screaming.

“How can he?”

“How dare he?”

Was the child destroying the mythology of the State? Oh yes! it was. This was the common noise and the States deities had to be restored.

Boots were romping nearer now. The country’s flag was flying full mast. Patriotism was throbbing in every vein and flowing through every drain. It was pulsating and the entire country resembled a musculature of hardened opinions.

The State wanted this child out. They reached into the mother squirming in labour. Cut open the womb and took the child out, Dead.

The child’s dissent survived. State could not take him out alive.

 

