From: Nichaela Shammah<nichaela23@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: The Oddity
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

My name is Scott Richard Hoying. My family is fairly normal, if you consider an anxiety-ridden mother after her husband’s death trying to raise three children on her own as your idea of normal. I’m seventeen now and I’m the middle child.

It was nearly the end of May so my last year of high school was approaching faster than I’d have liked. As I was thinking about how I was going to get through another year of high school, the ringing of my landline interrupted me. “Hello?”, I asked. “Hey, Scott? It’s me.” Travis always does this thing where he calls my landline and says “It’s me” and I’m somehow just supposed to know that it’s him. I mean, he is my only friend and it’s not like I don’t think about his deep, soothing voice every minute of everyday, reading to me and… “ Hello? Scott? Do you want to come over or not? It’ll just be us.” Oh dear Lord, just him and I? “Okay! I’ll be there!” “See you tonight, bye!” Why did I say yes? I’ve been feeling all these feelings for him all of a sudden and I don’t trust myself to keep it to myself. We’ve been friends since middle school and I can’t let a stupid crush come in the way of it all.

For the past month, my little sister Sophie and I have been carefully watching a boy who walks his dog, at exactly half past four in the evening. I think he just moved to our neighbourhood because I’ve never seen him here before. He’s odd. Today, he was wearing a white sleeveless top with a black skirt that reached down to his knees paired with purple converse shoes and a black hat. Sophie dares me to talk to this boy every day but I’m scared. Odd Boy is one of the few things that Sophie and I have in common.

I went over to Travis’ house that night feeling a bit nervous. I didn’t know why but I had a feeling in my gut. After dinner, we went up to his room where he said he needed to talk to me about something important. My heart was racing but I tried to look as calm as I possibly could.

“Scott, you know Claire, right?” “Yeah, what about her?” “Well, a couple of days ago, she asked me if I wanted to be her boyfriend and guess what I said?” No. No. No. I hope you said no. “Yes?” “YES! Oh my God Scott, you know she’s like the nicest girl in our school right? I can’t believe she asked ME!” Of course she did. “I’m happy for you, Trav.” “Yeah but see the thing is, she wants me to hang out with her friends from now.” Oh. I see where this is going. Boy dates girl, boy gets to hang out with the cool kids now, leaving behind sad little Scotty. “Hey, yeah. I totally understand. I’ll be fine by myself.” “It’s only at school though, Scott. We can still hang out at my place or yours whenever we want!” “That’s great. I have to get going now. I promised mum I’ll be home before 10.” I lied. Mum doesn’t care when I’m home. She probably hasn’t realised that I’m gone.

I was walking back home and as I was turning into my street, I bumped into Odd Boy. “Salutations.”, he said. “Salu-what?” “Greetings, I mean. Where are you off to, sir?” “Uh, I’m just going home.” “Ah yes, I’ve seen you and the little girl watching me from over your fence.” Oh shit. He knows? I thought we were hidden, but apparently not. “Oh um, we didn’t mean to be creepy. We were just looking at your odd collection of clothing.” “Odd, you call it? Why is that?” “Well, boys don’t wear skirts.” “Anybody can wear anything they like, silly boy.” Silly? He’s the one wearing skirts and he calls me silly. I’m so done with him. I’ve had a rough night already. “I have to go.” “Have a wonderful night ahead, sir. I will see you soon.” “Bye, Odd.”

Anybody can wear anything they like? Stupid, I thought. That night I couldn’t stop thinking about Odd Boy and his ways.

I woke up the next morning terrified of what was coming on my last first day of high school. I put together my usual jeans and one of my t-shirts and called it an outfit. My brother Brandon can drive but he never takes Sophie and I to school in the morning so we take the bus together. The school bus was unusually early this morning and we reached half an hour before the first bell. I walked up to the second floor and went in to the library so I didn’t have to be alone. I didn’t want to read or anything but I took a random book from one of the shelves and sat down on one of the chairs in the corner where no one can see me.

“The Catcher in the Rye?”, a familiar voice asked. I turned to the side to find Odd Boy taking a seat next to me. “Huh?” “I didn’t think you were the usual rebel kind.” He was wearing a red flannel shirt and leggings with a pair of black boots. “Well, I might be. My name is Scott, by the way.” “I’m Mitch Grassi. We met last night.” “Of course, I remember. Someone who’s as odd as you are is hard to forget.” “Why do you keep saying that? Odd? Just because you’re wired to think of the clothes people wear as a form of gender identity doesn’t make me odd at all. You should try wearing skirts some day, Scott. I’d lend you mine but you’re a size too big.” The first bell interrupted our conversation so I scurried to class without as much as a “See you later!”

Mitch was beautiful, to be honest. A beautiful boy. He had a chiselled jawline, a perfect nose, plump, slightly pink lips and brown eyes that could have you captivated forever. You could lose yourself in his curls. Maybe that’s what I was scared of. I didn’t mind so much that he was “odd” anymore. I really need a friend. I mean, I don’t have Travis to hang out with anymore so I guess I’ll hang out with Mitch. “Scott Hoying? Can you solve question 4 on the board?” Oh no, never get called on by Mr. Gerald. He only calls on people when he knows they’ve been dreaming and not paying attention. “No, Sir.” “Then pay attention!” Ah, guess it’s time to stop thinking about Mitch.

That evening after school, Sophie and I got into the school bus and I found Mitch there already with a seat saved for me. He told me that his family had only recently moved into our neighbourhood and that he could really use a friend to show him around. I went over to his house that evening and his black Labrador, Jagga, greeted me. “She loves people.”, he said and walked up the stairs to where I assumed was his room.

Mitch showed me his closet of clothes and I was stunned, honestly. He had so many varieties of clothes. He told me that clothes shouldn’t conform us to our genders, you know. “I’m all about breaking gender stereotypes. Paint my nails, give me your high heels or don’t, they’re actually very uncomfortable. But you get the point, Scott.” I was slowly starting to understand where he came from. “Mitch, I want to do something.” I think my sly smile gave away what I was thinking and he immediately screamed, “YES!”

Mitch and I got out the school bus next morning and all eyes were on us. We heard mumbling, whispering and even screaming but we carried on walking unfazed by everything around us. I was wearing a blue skirt with a yellow top, and a pair of converse shoes. Mitch was wearing a skirt as well; it was black and paired with a blue flannel. He looked great. WE looked great. As we passed by the parking lot, Travis looked at the two of us wide-eyed and I gave him the biggest smile I possibly could. I felt amazing. It felt amazing to break gender stereotypes in whatever little way I could. This is only one of the many things I was going to get to do with Mitch Grassi this year in high school and I honestly couldn’t wait for the rest of the year. “See you at lunch, Odd.” 

