From: Bhargav Prasad<bhara10dec@gmail.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Wait, there’s more…
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

She has never brought this up. Or, has she? Did I dismiss it? I am sure it’s not true. It can’t be. She loves me. I love her. But she seems to be intrigued by the idea. It’s just an idea. Or is it? What if she wants to do it? What if she already has?

 It didn’t matter whether my phone was next to the pillow or the side table. The change in environment didn’t seem to bother me for once. My laptop, next to me on the bed, had been up way past its bedtime. I preferred sleeping by 1. That was the only way I could get 7 hours of sleep, wake up, make breakfast by myself, not depend on Ramu Stall’s fresh Vada Pavs, and be in the office by 10. It wasn’t an easy regime to stick by. Especially since I wasn’t used to the pace of the city. I never had to plan my masturbatory sessions, until I moved. I didn’t have the time or the energy to start with some images, move on the shorter videos, and end with the big finish. Exploring my own body felt like I privilege. One of the many privileges I had lost since moving to the big city.

 Spending time with her had never been a privilege. I was entitled to it. Entitlement, not a reflection of my personality, but by virtue of the time I had been with her. We had turned one right before I left. We had planned on doing it for the very first time - a farewell present of sorts and an anniversary gift. It was perfect. My knowledge about the body of a woman is restricted to hitting the second base in college a few times; times that the women involved seem to have no recollection of. She had never been with a man.

 We had never had to start dating formally. I knew she was the one when I looked at her. I got my confirmation when we spoke about our mutual love for Sorkin. We even did a mock-Sorkin conversation. There was a rhythm. Something characteristic of Sorkin’s characters. I felt like a Sorkin character for the very first time. I am sure she did. Why else would she play along with me?

 My phone had suffered enough. Moving from the side table to the pillow and back to the table, motion sickness struck my phone. I couldn’t help myself. I loved reading her messages over and over again. There was a lot of thought, a flow of thought uncharacteristic for a girl of her age. However, this time, I was reading it to make sure that I had read it right. My vocabulary isn’t the greatest. But I never had to Google.

 Polyamory

 “It isn’t an open relationship. It’s like having different relationships with multiple people”

 “Sex?”

 “Not exactly, but I guess it depends on.”

 “On what?”

 “Whether I want to have sex with them or not. My interest, my consent.”

 “And what do I do?”

 “What do you mean what do you do? I am not suggesting that we have a polyamorous relationship. I am just telling you that it’s a great way to live life”

 I couldn’t reply to that. Reply of any form would have been a grave of indulgence that I resisted from. But I had to ask her. I had to. How could I keep it to myself? We have never been a couple who kept things from each other. Even thoughts that were mundane, minuscule, and outright absurd were voiced. We understood each other. I knew her. She knew me. That’s all that mattered. Why would we need other people in our lives?

 We have spoken about cheating in the past. Infidelity is a sour word that garnishes our conversations from time to time. I did trust her. Of course, I did. But I didn’t trust other men. It was a dangerous world out there. One shot of tequila and your tongue is down another man’s throat. Mistakes happen. But a mistake like this can always go untold. She wouldn’t keep anything from. Would she?

 The Vada Pavs accompanied by my sleep deprivation had woken up the hibernating liquid-induced coma: acidity. I had to use the bathroom. Working in an office with only 6 people, the acoustics in the bathroom often played orchestra in our 1BHK startup. I preferred finishing my duties at home. I always did. But my cycle was fucked up today. I woke up 9:30.

 “Did you actually mean it?”

 She hadn’t replied to my customary “Good Morning :*” message. Maybe she hadn’t woken up. College didn’t start until 1. Or maybe she didn’t want to.

 I make sure that I keep my farts noiseless. I even turned on the tap; a useful life hack that I had read on the Internet, ironically, when on the toilet at home.

 Ping.

 “Yes”

 I hadn’t realized that the little bucket that had earlier been used to paint the walls of the bathroom had started overflowing. The pressure that I was channeling to get Ramu’s Vada Pavs out of me had shifted base. Was our relationship coming to an end?

 “All of us are polyamorous. We have different relationships with different people. It’s beautiful. Why do we have to restrict ourselves with labels? Why can’t we enjoy different dynamics with different people?”

 She didn’t make sense. I have always been wary of the poly words. Polygamy. Polyandry. And, now, Polyamorous. Surely, this had to be illegal too.

 I begin typing Is Polyamory illegal in. I stop. I backspace. I close the app. I put my phone inside my pocket. I got up. I was a creature of habit. Amidst all this chaos, I made sure I flushed.

 Four months into our relationship, when she started drinking regularly, I started fearing the worst. I had to protect myself. I had to protect her. We made a pact. If we do end up liking or wanting to fuck somebody else, we would tell the other person before we act on it.

 I put Didi’s chappati and spicy rajma in my mouth, one rajma at a time. Maybe we shouldn’t have made the pact. I start panicking. Maybe she had forgotten the pact. She acted on it and forgot to tell me. The rajma wasn’t spicy anymore. I was sweating. Was it the thought of her with another man or her depiction of disloyalty that made me fear for my life?

 I put the plate in the sink. The sink’s empty. My roommates aren’t back. They never seem to be around. In the three months that I had been a resident of this 2BHK abode, I have had 2 interactions with my roommates. They seem like nice people. Ever since I started dating her, my negligible number of friends in my clique seemed more apparent. Every time I didn’t end up spending time with her was a time that went in solidarity. I didn’t want anybody else. We had each other. She had other friends. But I am sure they were just friends. I mattered to her more. Or was I just another friend who had sexual benefits?

 “Am I just another friend?”

 “What?

 “What’s different between me and your other friends?”

 “You are one of the most important people in my life”

 “One of the?”

 “Not THE”

 “Why not? I thought you loved me.”

 “I do. But I also love other people”

 “Is that possible?”

 “Yes. Just because I love other people, doesn’t mean I don’t love you any less.”

 “I thought we were committed”

 “We are.”

 “But you can have sex with other people”

 “I don’t plan on having sex with other people. All I am saying is that you are allowed to have sex with other people if you want to too”

 “But I don’t want to”

 “Well, I can separate sex from love. If I find someone I want to have sex with for a night, I am allowed to, and so are you. That doesn’t that fact that I still love you. It just means that my body and mind are two different things”

 “That’s cheating. You are committed to me”

 “It’s called Polyamory. Look it up.”

 I am not a thrower of phones. No incident would incite such a reaction from me. This clearly wasn’t one. But I didn’t reply to her. That was a reaction that I am not known for.

 Sex with other men. Cheating. Love. Lust.

 Déjà vu. It was only 12 today. I still had time to get to my 8 hours of sleep. I had no answers. Am I not good enough for her sexually?

 We tried skyping once. I took off my pants. She didn’t. She never says rude things to me. I found the idea of virtual sex stimulating. She liked human body on body. I did too. But our long distance had stripped us of such privileges.

 Is that why she wants to have sex with other men? Is it because I wasn’t there?

 She had discovered a word to validate her need for sex. Commitment takes work. I would never cheat on her. Shouldn’t I be okay with the idea of polyamory before she acts on solidifying it?

 I was always open to sorting things out. I had never been a man of aggression. I liked rationalizing. Maybe she misses me. This could be her call for attention. I have been away for 3 months. She has needs. Maybe she wants me to come down. Maybe I should get her a dildo. That’s probably what she wants. It’s the sex, right?

 Or had my brain, a proud organ of mine, an organ that I thought was capable of molding to change given up on this new word. It was a concept that was beyond comprehension. Why would someone who loves me want to be with other people?

 Did she just want to break up? We hadn’t spoken about it in a long time. She would tell me if she did want to. This was probably a call for attention. I had been quite busy at work. And besides, she loves me too much to ever be with another person.

 I go into the kitchen. I grab a glass of water. I drink it. My roommates still hadn’t gotten back home. It was awfully late. I didn’t care. I had to sort it out with her. Polyamory was just a trigger. She wants sex. From me.

 The last time we did try having it, before my leaving, she had passed out. She boasted of capacity that stood no match for the quantity of alcohol in her presence. I couldn’t get mad at her for passing out. And besides, physical intimacy is not a need; it had been a luxury in the lives of a couple in their early twenties.

 Polyamory is cheating. Multiple relationships are adultery. There were no two ways around it. Fancy words don’t make for a nuanced concept. Maybe it wasn’t a cry for help. Passive aggression wouldn’t sort anything. In fact, she hated it.

 “Hey, what’s up?

 No reply.

 Maybe she’s out. It was Wednesday. She’s definitely out. It was ladies night at her favorite watering hole.

 I panic. I call my mother instead. My mother was making her appearance on the top of my speed dial for the first time. We hadn’t spoken in a while.

 I fumble. I call again.

 “Hello?”

 “Babe, can I call you back? I am outside”

 “Don’t hang up. I need to talk to you”

 I hear a dial tone in place of her voice.

 I panic. I call again. She doesn’t pick up. I call again. Her phone seems to be engaged. I call again. It’s switched off. Lying down, 1600 kilometers from her, I didn’t have a lot of luck communicating with her.

 I lie down. I try listening to some music. I didn’t want my thoughts to get the better of me like they always do.

 Maybe she’s with another man. Maybe she’s just with her friends.

 I am interrupted mid-thought. It’s her. I wait for a few seconds. I don’t want her to think that I am waiting for her call. But my temptation gets the better of me. I don’t commit to my bit. I pick up.

 “Hey”

 I sense a distance in her voice. Post-coital chills. I have read about it.

 “I know it’s out of the blue, but I want to clear some things. Before that, why was your phone switched off? What were you doing?”

 I try to sound calm. I don’t want to come across as codependent. That will stop her from answering me. I want to know the answer. Was she with another man?

 “Nothing. Why?

 I hesitate.

 “Were you with another man?’

 Silence. Questions with affirmative answers are often punctuated by silence.

 “Were you?”

 “It’s not your place to ask.”

 “What do you mean? I’m your boyfriend”

 I had never been a fair representation of masculinity. But my voice displayed traits of it. Maybe she found it sexy.

 “Well, in a polyamorous relationship, it’s futile to get jealous of each other’s other partners. It’s unhealthy.”

 “We are not polyamorous! I didn’t agree to it. I love you too much to see you be with another man. Please, don’t do it”

 My pleading had negated my sexiness. I didn’t care.

 I wanted her to pity me. If that’s how it’s meant to be, then that’s how it will be. I wait for a response. We had been together for a year. I am sure she’ll understand.

 I hear a dial tone. I drop my phone.

 I had been cheated on. 

