From: Himika Ganguly<himi.1711@gmail.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: For Nora
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

 “The leather clothing, the $12000 watch studded with diamonds, the flashy car, these are just equipment. They will buy you eyeballs sure, but they will not do the selling. That is a brain thing.”

Karen was in a situation that most women would shudder at the idea of. It was a long drive from New York city where she had first met Jerry King, a tall, dark forty five year old nigger with a very heavy Russian accent. He claimed to be a highly established player in the business of international trade and that was partly true. Just that, the trade involved women. Jerry King was one of the many glorified pimps of downtown Chicago who with shallow promises of great money and lavish life in return for few hours of commoditising flesh corrupted the Great Indian American dream inch by inch each day, for the fairer sex of the country.

Karen’s mind resurfaced back to the afternoon of 14th February. She had finished her low calorie work meal of greens and baked potatoes only ten minutes back when the call had come from Saint Anne’s hospital where Nora had been admitted. The name was a guess work that relied on the tattoo on her right wrist.

The first sight of the fifteen year old girl made Karen’s heart bleed. She was bruised by a forced miscarriage which was the outcome of demonic beating. The doctors had chosen to perform hysterectomy and that meant something very disturbingly deep. The right to bear a child was about to be taken away from an innocent girl who possibly didn't even understand the immenseness of that loss. 14th February was not supposed to involve anything that barbaric for any girl. Doctor Evan explained the case to Karen and with that knowledge in her head when she returned to the Chicago police headquarters, officer Karen Sanders put the case up to her subordinates and seniors. Nora had not yet regained her consciousness. They had been unable to track her family. She was discovered near a drain very close to one of the lowly bars which were heavily frequented by pimps and prostitutes looking to make a quick buck. The case was very simple. Nora who was being pushed into flesh trade was disposed away very angrily and brutally by her owner because of an unwelcoming pregnancy. Rape, violation of human rights, abuse, the case was fair and worthy on all grounds. But again, the lack of testimony and evidence changed the game. The Chicago police had searched their databases and ran an alert about Nora all afternoon since she was found, but nobody had come forth or recognised her. Next morning, the decision to not pursue the case was taken. Karen was not convinced.

“We have tried everything we could. Ms Sanders, nobody has come up to either recognise her or even speak about what might have happened. There is no eye witness.” Jason Salvatore, a senior official tried convincing a very angry Karen.

“No there is. You know the problem is this entire crime is looked down upon so much that we are not even trying to dig deep. You did not see Nora in the hospital did you?”

“I appreciate your sympathy Karen. However what we need here is not sympathy but a through and clear approach. Doctor Evan says there is a pimp who caused the grave injuries. But how do we know for sure? The girl has not yet spoken.” Lara Thomas, a subordinate and one of Karen’s competitors for the next big position challenged the case and very obviously.

The team collectively disagreed to give the case a chance. Maybe a 15 year old grievously injured girl with nobody routing for her was not important enough. It was the third time in her eight years long career, Karen did not sleep sound. The next morning arrived with more tragedy. Nora had passed away.

Now there would be no more testimony. The case was buried.

“It is not the first of the cases Mrs. Sanders. Little girls as young as twelve or eleven sometimes are forced into this illegal business and their bodies are treated like machines. Machines riding on currency sometimes as meagre as 20 bucks. And they are slaves to their pimps or as they like to be called, masters. And most of the time, the escape has been death. Which again is actually murder often.” Doctor Evan had arranged for Nora’s burial ceremony and Karen had been requested to join in. After the funeral service, when they finished talking, Karen realised the graveness and the fact of the matter.

First, Nora was not the first girl to suffer such a gruesome end. It had happened earlier and it would keep happening again and again.

Secondly, when you clean dirt, you have to get your hands dirty.

It was eight months to this day. Today Karen Sanders was a far cry from the uptight and collared uniform clad strict police officer who stuck to logic and law before making any statement or causing action. Instead a painfully tiny pink bling tube dress babe with slightly untidy blonde hair and a flashy disturbing orange lip gloss, crystal studded high stilettos and flirtatious mannerisms is what she represented. Kiara was the new name of this woman who had climbed dizzy heights in the escorting business of America. Her master Jerry King was making more money than he had ever imagined. In less than a year’s time Kiara had entered the ring and proved to be the money magnet of America’s desire business. Jerry was a happy man. And Kiara was finally beginning to feel that victory was near and the light at the end of the tunnel was very close. Tonight they were going to attend the Pleasure Ball at Cleopatra’s Palace in the sin city. This was that one time of the year when the dealers and traders of the prostitution business of America got together to celebrate and discuss more avenues of cheating, luring and often doing away with the not so money churning items. Like Nora.

Kiara looked into the mirror of the washroom at Cleopatra’s Palace. The last eight months had been arduous. Physically and mentally. To begin with, she took a break from her somewhat illustrious career in the pretext of sorting out her failing marriage. The marriage sadly did fail. Karen undeterred from the ongoing turmoil had still gone after the one singular goal that had kept her awake for numerous nights. Doctor Evan and his wife Sarah who worked with The Challenged Girls society, an NGO that worked for betterment of young abused women and helped them come out of the tragedies that they were encountering, had wholeheartedly supported her decision. Soon a makeover followed and 29 year old Karen turned into Kiara Williams, a Mexican street dweller. She realised quite early that the sex business industry was very liberal. It did not matter whether you were white, black, brown, yellow or Italian, American, Chinese, Nigerian or Pakistani. All that was needed was a consenting seller. The buyers were many. Jerry King was not Kiara’s first procurer. She started with a cheaper Tony Stanley, a South African old, bearded, jersey clad man who wore too many rings and used too many crass words. Tony had seven girls to sell and Kiara soon became the queen of the team. That was the toughest part of the plan. To actually get dirty. Though she was aware that this would eventually happen, but planning and then practically executing were two very different things. The first time it happened, Kiara cried all night. The feeling did not get any better. Each night was practically the same. Just that she somehow learnt to sleep in between the horrors of the days, convincing herself that very soon all of this would be over. Finally one day at a slightly upmarket New York bar, Kiara was spotted by Jerry King, one of the affluent kings of the escorting services business. She got traded almost immediately for an undisclosed amount of money. It was a matter of great astonishment for a woman who was just five months into the business to fetch such a worthy buyer. There were reasons. First beauty, second demand and third word of mouth. The rules of a promotion in flesh business were just like any other business.

“Are you ready Jason?” Karen Sanders dialled her old friend who was with his team standing on high alert at a safe distance from Cleopatra’s Palace with his team of twenty armed officers. Tonight was going to be a big night.

“Yes, we are good to go in.” Jason replied back to his former ex colleague. He was somewhere guilty for not believing and agreeing with her and would say his sorries on another day. At a better time.

“Okay. It is 10 pm right now. There are one hundred and five of them. All drunk and wasted or at least to the extent of losing control of every sense. So you may attack.” Karen knew this was the right moment. She had waited to do this.

“You mean now now? Okay!” Jason turned to his team and signalled that it was time for the assault.

Three

Two

One

Go





Next morning, the headlines of The New York Times-

“30 minutes, 25 casualties, 77 sex traders and 55 sex workers arrested. That is a safer America”

The news story had Karen Sanders written all over it. She had been the mastermind who along with Doctor Evan, Sarah and later the Chicago police, had strategised the highly hazardous operation. Yes, this was the one in which the chances of getting caught and paying the price by nothing less than life was very high. And still, Karen had chosen a temporary dual life with a new identity of Kiara Williams. Eight months of living at the edge of death, inside the home of the devil. And today, the rest was history written in gold and framed in platinum.

The very same year, the America Guard of Honour Awards were announced. When Karen went up on stage dressed in a red Zara gown that prestigious evening and the whole of America applauded in honour of the woman who had given the illegal and shameful flesh trade industry of the world a harsh warning to stay off the American soil, the host asked her the how and why of her achievement. She smiled as she took over the mike confidently and with her head held high.

“Sometimes only one in a group of thousands will disagree and sometimes that one will be right. Sometimes dissent alone leads to the right action. Sometimes dissent is the highest form of patriotism. Sometimes dissent is the only way to do good. To the people. To the country. To Nora.” 

