From: Shweta Sunderkrishnan<shwetasunder@yahoo.co.in>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Two Bullets Left
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

He checked his pistol, 2 bullets left. Looking behind to see an empty road, he heaved a sigh of relief. With the sound of approaching footsteps, he quickly hid behind a small wall. Stealthily, he aimed at the person approaching and pulled the trigger. Before the person slumped to the ground, he heard the shuffling of feet from behind him. He swirled around to check, trying to find his way in the darkness, when something struck him. He let out a piercing cry that echoed through the valleys. Feelings of despair and regret crossed his mind. And incandescent white light was the last thing he saw. The next morning in Gorakhpur was a sunny one but there was still a certain chill in the air. Winter was not yet over and neither was British rule in India. It was the year of 1922. Brave warriors and fighters had laid down their lives for the nation, for freedom. Many were still fighting and he was now one among them. He was not the kind to give up easily.

So hours later, he managed to open his eyes. He found himself locked in a cold cellar where the air was damp and smelt funny. The cell had no bars and it was claustrophobic. His head felt heavy and he was stiff all over. He tried to get up but could not. It all started two days back.

Jay Bhargav was an ordinary twenty year old guy. He had been living in Ghorakhpur all his life. Tall, handsome, with warm grey eyes, he was quite a charmer. Life was perfect, he was about to get engaged to the girl of his dreams. Everything had been set, the pandal, the decorations etc. When suddenly a riot had broken out in his town. Within minutes everything turned into chaos. A police station had been set on fire. Stones were being thrown around. There were gun shots everywhere. It seemed as if the gates of hell had been opened. People ran for safety. Cries could be heard in the air. A non cooperation peaceful protest had turned violent.

Jay and his family ran towards their home. But Jay got separated in the crowd. He found himself trapped in a shed. He had no choice but to sit there and wait for the situation to calm down. He sat and prayed. Soon nightfall turned into morning. Jay peeped out, things seemed okay. So he dashed for his house.

 On reaching home, he found his mother in tears. His brother had been arrested in a police raid. They said he had disrupted peace. "But he is innocent", wailed his mother. Something inside Jay snapped. He took his late father’s pistol and stepped outside. He was infuriated. He went up to the police academy and fired a blind shot out of anger. All he wanted was to free his brother who was wrongfully arrested. Considering his income, a lawyer was not an option. What followed was a series of run and chase, which went on all day .The outcome of which ended in Jay being locked up in a cell.

He realized his mistake and began looking around in his cell, when he saw a woman who was locked up along with him. She wore a simple cotton sari and had a bright tilak on her head. There was something about her that put Jay at ease. She asked him his name. ”it’s Jay bharghav, but everyone calls me manu." "What a coincidence, that's my pet name too!” For the first time, after many days, Jay smiled. “Why are you here?” asked Jay. “I long to see my country free.. I have fought many a battles for the same. Swaraj is everyone's birthright,” she said. Jay couldn't agree more."I have to get out of here and save my elder brother. He is the closest father figure; I have in my life" said Jay." I know what it is like to grow up without a father. I think I can help you, follow me, she said. And Jay obliged, with great effort he got up. The cell was made of panels. She led him to one corner of it and pointed. This panel here is a loose one, trust me, I have great experience in escaping. All u need to do is push it hard.

Gathering all his strength, Jay managed to push it. It cracked but it didn't completely give away. After several attempts, the panel broke. If one ducked and knelled, there was enough space to go through. They did the same and found themselves in a long corridor. She then went left and checked, there was no one. So Jay followed and soon the passage led to a flight of stairs. They climbed down slowly, as quietly as possible.

She then said, "These stairs end at a police ground which is in the outskirts of the city. All the inmates who have been arrested this week are kept over here behind bars. Find your brother's cell and open the lock using my hair clip". Saying this she handed him her hair clip. It was long, sturdy and shaped like a key. She continued, "On rescuing him, you both make a run for it. Don't worry about the guards, they will be fast asleep. It’s past midnight." "What about you?" asked Jay. "Don't worry about me, I'll be fine. I can't leave, not yet, not till we get swaraj." "When will I see you next?" The day we get swaraj, will be the day we can meet. We shall meet at the town hall in Delhi. Jay did not wish to leave her, but time was short. With a heavy heart he parted ways. He then followed her instructions to the T. His brother was most surprised on seeing him. After a few attempts Jay opened the lock. Just like she said the guards were fast asleep. In the silence of the night they managed to escape.

On reaching the heart of the city, Jay's brother, Raju, asked, “how did you know where I was? ". "Well, I got help, from a woman. She was standing at the other end of the ground. Did you not see her?" No, I didn't see anyone, replied Raju. Never mind...

They reached home and on seeing them their family's happiness knew no bounds. Soon things were back to normal. But Jay always scanned or looked for the woman, the angel who helped him in the time of need. Be it in the newspaper or somewhere on the road. But up to no avail. 25 years later India got independence. The dream of Jay's and the dream of every Indian got fulfilled. Jay had not forgotten his promise .He was in the town hall, in Delhi, waiting. He waited for quite some time. He was about to leave when his eyes fell on a statue. It was his angel! Wearing the same sari and tilak; Sitting on a horse with a sword in hand. He looked down to see her nameplate. Rani lakshmi Bai was all it read. 

