From: Shivani Bhasin<shivanikbhasin@gmail.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: A Call To Calm
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

This is the second time that she has explicitly disobeyed her elders. Last evening, she left her long, lustrous, jet black hair loose in front of the neighbour’s house. When Taayaji found her loitering there, he let free a ferocious litany of spit and angry words. She had made the mistake of unfolding her tresses in front of a Muslim man. “Musalman ke saamne, in front of a Man” said her Uncle repeatedly until all that was left in the sea of his rage was the portmanteau Muslim-man. Munnu had averted her eyes and gone to sulk in her room. Taayaji’s spasmic yells would definitely earn her a nice, firm lecture from her father later on. She didn’t dwell on it for too long. Munnu knew that dadi had a soft spot for her eldest granddaughter, and nobody, not even Taayaji or Papa, held any illusions over who was the real source of power within the household.

Today, she had decided to go to Chowpatty, just in time to make a mockery of her curfew. For Munnu had heard a dazzling tale from her friends. Her curiosity grew bigger and bigger, until it itched and burned and demanded the cool balm of discovery. So listen, all. Listen well and carefully. Munnu is not in the habit of explaining her actions to strangers. And I, her storyteller, have even less patience inscribing the tales of others.

On a cold, Amaavas night you will see a lady dressed from head to toe in white. She doesn’t talk to you, only beckons. Little children follow her the same way they follow a sweetmeats or bhelpuri seller. Her long hair falls to her ankles and obscures her face. She will lead you to paths unknown. You must not look into her eyes because this woman is a chudail, a daayan, a witch. The moment you lock eyes with her, you go absolutely mad. Or pagal-bananas as the children call it. Soon, people will begin to avoid you on the streets and your parents will abandon you too, till you are left shitting and pissing on the road, an urban animal.

Munnu was determined to look into the chudail’s eyes. So she walked on bravely, as heroes from fairy tales are wont to do. She soon grew confused as the sky painted itself blue, violet and finally inky-black. At last, she stopped at a streetlight near the beach and groped around in her purse for a mint. So absorbed was she in her task, that she drew a startled gasp when a stranger stopped close to her. “Haii, you scared me, didi” exclaimed Munnu to the stranger who, we must note, was dressed from head to toe in white. All of Munnu’s valour and bravery abandoned her as soon as she looked at this woman, and so she fixed her gaze steadfastly at the border of the stranger’s sari. It was painted a cheery pink.

“Are you lost, child?” enquired the stranger. On hearing her voice, the little girl felt a desperate urge to weep. For the stranger’s voice was sweet as a jasmine’s and held in it a comforting warmth that Munnu had only ever felt when she buried her face in her mother’s sari. She shook her head dumbly in response which led the older woman to pat her in a reassuring manner, like one would to a pet. “I’ll find you” was all the stranger said to her and it was enough for Munnu to slip her little palm into the woman’s bigger hand and allow her to lead.

They walked towards the sea.

“The moon is absent tonight, either off to satisfy Daksha’s curse or to fulfil Rohini’s desires”, said the stranger. The child looked blank and so, the woman elaborated:

Once upon a time the moon was married off to Daksha’s twenty-seven daughters. This was a time when men could give away hundreds of women as prizes. Men still do that but now of course; law, government and public morality dictates that you can give away only one. If she turns out to be fit as a fiddle, then you must add only a cooker, refrigerator and car to make up for the lost ninety-nine. If she turns out to be as stubborn as an ox, then you must administer a beating or two or perhaps even switch her out for one of her sisters.

Anyway. The moon, gallant and ideal, was chosen to be the husband of twenty-seven sisters. Soon, however, he fell in love with the beautiful Rohini and began to neglect the rest of his harem. Daksha’s remaining progeny grew bitter and resentful, all for having the gall to demand equal respect and love from their husband. Lacking a brother, they complained to their father of the moon’s favouritism. Daksha promptly cursed the moon; he would disappear in the next fifteen days, deprived of both his beautiful Rohini and his dashing good looks. Faced with this hideous possibility, the moon did a lot of penance and yadda yadda yadda and so Shiva said he would re-appear in fifteen days, back to Rohini and co, his beautiful cleft chin (the sure sign of a womanizer!), ravishing dimples et all restored.

“What lesson did you learn from this story, child?” enquired the stranger. Munnu did not speak but looked up and met the woman’s eyes. They were dark brown and framed by pointy lashes. She replied, asking, “Amma, are you a chudail?” The woman threw her head back and let out a riot of laughter. “Do I look like a chudail to you? You called me didi, now I am your Amma. I suppose this kind of schizophrenia is normal. Just yesterday, a man called me a whore. Another fell to my feet and said I was devi ka swaroop. Now, what am I exactly?”

Munnu considered this question for a while and said, “I don’t think you are a chudail. You haven’t tried to eat me yet. And you haven’t made an effort to make me mad, either. If you really are a daayan, I think you’re very bad at your job”. The strange woman, equal parts chudail, prostitute, mother, sister and shakti only smiled in response. “My name is Jamuna”, she told the child. “I have flitted from one place to another for eternity. You may know my more famous sister, Ganga, for she is beauteous and abundant and tends to attract the more pious lot. In her shadow, I am very small and so I must be content with the stragglers, the strugglers, hustlers, women of the night, women with fight, women who give you a fright”.

Munnu took in this impassioned outburst with a serene look. She didn’t have much to add to the stranger’s words but she was suddenly very aware of two facts: that she wanted to sleep, and could didi take her home, please.

Munnu’s legendary stubbornness meant that she had more in common with a beggar child than with the plump lord-sahibs of her locality. Her mother might be loath to admit this, but nobody could stop the child when she had her mind set on some zidd. In this case, she wanted to see a chudail, look into eyes as red as sindoor and touch hair as unruly as a bunch of snakes. She wanted to go to her friends and say there is no chudail, there is only a woman. Sometimes she looks angry, sometimes mad, sometimes lost. If you look at her face, and find emotions too kaleidoscopic to exist, then you might get scared and scream: Chudail! Daayan! Bachao! But that is really your reaction, not her reality.

The girl and the woman looked at the sea one last time. The sky was slowly welcoming dawn. Then they began the long trek home. Munnu doesn’t remember much of it, because she went straight from watchman uncle’s arms to her mother’s.

At this point, the narrator has two choices. Should she continue knowing that she has cheated her audience of a juicy ghost story? Or should she stop, knowing that in this country, a girl’s story only becomes interesting to readers when it comes to a gruesome end?

What happened next, exactly, is this:

The next morning, Munnu’s mother, Papa, taayaji, dadi and dadaji all gathered around her and yelled. Like crows feeding, one began when the other finished and it was decided that Munnu would not be allowed to leave her home for a very long time.

Meanwhile, in the locality, gossip flourished and it was believed that Munnu bitiya had been touched by the raat-wali daayan and become a little mad. Well-meaning neighbours said that the Anand parivaar was doing everything right by keeping that poor girl out of view. It was heard that the girl had contracted a fever and mumbled strange things about the moon, rivers, tides and dawn. It was best to keep her at home. Who knew what she might spread?

As for what really happened, only Munnu’s mother knew. Watchman uncle had found her child only when night began to die. He had simply looked at his employer and recounted this tale: “Bhabhi, I heard the sound of jingling payals first. The sound was coming slowly. I got very scared so I turned away and started praying to all the Gods I knew. When that didn’t work, I tried to run, but the sound only became more frenzied. I saw a woman dressed in white. She came to me with the child in her arms. Hair as long as a rope. White sari. I did not have the courage to even look up. When she walked away, I noticed that her feet were turned in the opposite direction and that she was walking very, very slowly”.

“And Munnu?”

“She is the devi swaroop, even the chudail bows to her”. 

