From: Dyuti Mishra<mishradyuti@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: A User’s Guide to Compliance
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

It all started with that tiny white pill.

“Just a little something to help you sleep,” the psychiatrist said, “Nothing to strong or habit-forming.”

“What is it?” you ask. Because you want to know. You always want to know.

“If you want to give it a name,” he says, clearly uncomfortable with giving you that kind of ammunition, “It’s a very mild anti-depressant.”

“Does this mean I’m depressed?” you ask.

“We’re not sure yet,” he says in that mild-mannered way which is the most obvious evasive trick in the book, “But this should help you fall asleep.”

You want to ask how it will work. You want to ask why he’s prescribing an anti-depressant when all you want is something to help you sleep, even if temporarily, because you haven’t slept in over a week and that has in no way (miraculously? suspiciously?) affected your productivity at work but all you want right now is to fall asleep and not dream of water or ships or the Fight Club sequel that never got made (but you already have a plot and maybe you should pitch it to someone somewhere), just fall asleep and wake up in the morning and have a hard time remembering your dream—like those normal people do. You want to ask why he used the pronoun ‘we’ when it was just him reaching these conclusions.

But you settle down, say “Okay” and “thanks” and leave his cabin. And now here you are, at your office desk, fighting the fog in your head. But, to the psychiatrist’s credit, you slept fine. You don’t remember your dream or the night or how you got dressed and landed up at work today. So it worked. The pill worked. This is what other people must feel like, you think. Other people sleep for six hours straight and don’t remember their dreams and like the act of sleeping. You are twenty-seven and you have never known what it is to like sleeping. But it sure must feel like this.

Three fogged up months later and you’re at your desk again. That one tiny pill has made new friends. They’re big and small and white and pink and you take them at night or in the morning. Every day is a Sisyphean task of taking pills, diving headfirst into oblivion, waking up numb and dazed and a leaden head, taking more pills and wishing, hoping, praying you’d navigate through the labyrinth in your fuzzy brain long enough to look interested in what your colleagues are saying. This one colleague is telling you about her Tinder date last night and it’s taking you an incredible amount of effort to arrange your face in a way that looks sufficiently attentive. You’re having trouble concentrating which is new because you’ve never had trouble before. You’ve lost your patience with people—your editor even—when they couldn’t focus long enough for you to finish what you had to say. Now you’re bleary and glassy-eyed and lost. But you’ll go unnoticed. You vaguely register how you go unnoticed these days.



“You feel too much,” your ex would say, “Your problem in life is you feel too much.”

You consider this for a moment. Flip this thought over and over in your head like a pancake. Feels like an eternity spent in silence but you manage to reply, “I don’t know how not to feel. I don’t know how to modulate it.”

He says nothing but keeps looking at you, and in that moment, you realise you’re with a stranger. Strange empty eyes staring back at you. You don’t know this person.

“It’s not normal,” he says.





Five months, five pills a day and you’ve never felt better. You still can’t sleep but who cares anyway. You’re writing three pieces a day at work, typing so fast your colleagues must warn you to keep it down or you’ll break the keyboard. Keyboard Slayer, they call you at the office now. You secretly like it. You like the attention and awe they direct towards you. You like getting done before most people have even started. You like chugging coffee like it’s beer and chugging beer after the day is done. You like having an audience when you’re speaking. They don’t understand a word of what you just said and have to ask you to slow down and repeat yourself but you mock them for not being able to keep up. You’re sharp and witty and winning and smart and who needs sleep when you are this invincible. Your editor says she’s concerned but you brush it off and declare you’re off your meds now. “Isn’t that great?” you ask her, “Now I can write three stories a day for you!”



You’ve reached the six-month mark and subsequently crashed. You’ve stopped going to work or getting out of bed except to answer the door when the delivery guys are here. Pizzas followed by ice cream bars followed by complex carbs in whatever shape, size, colour and price they come. You spend your days binge watching TV shows you’ve already binge watched and binge eating whatever you can, one followed by the other. You’ve stopped taking showers, stopped washing your face and if anyone could tell you, they’d tell you that you smell.

Your appointment was at 11 in the morning but it’s 6 pm now and you’re sitting on the floor, wearing jut a towel, staring at your wardrobe and waiting. You don’t know how long you’ve been sitting here for, you can’t remember when and how the knife got here, on the floor. All you know is your brain is trying to talk you out of going through with this, going through the quotidian motions. Your brain is trying to talk you out of falling into this pattern of existing because why would you want to. It’s not like you’re changing lives or in some way changing the very fabric of society and culture. You are bringing everyone and everything down so you might as well just end it. End this. But you wait for it to pass. Just sit here, staring at your closet and ask for a little time. That’s all you need – time.



You’re back on that daily cocktail of pills. Not by choice so much as necessity. You had to drag yourself back, against your will and good sense and everything Foucault has ever taught you, and get a fresh prescription from your psychiatrist so you could make it through the day like most people do. You asked for normalcy, for programmed functioning. You asked for a solution so you could be like them. Because being like you is just no good. Being like you is to be acutely aware of the meaninglessness of all your actions – right from your morning coffee to the monthly reports you file in. Being like is to question the validity and ethics of every action your company takes when everyone else is only questioning profit margins and individual productivity. Being like you is being perpetually fractured in a world full of complete sentences and fully formed people. You cannot go on being like you.

The days are now just days in theory. Monday is the same as Thursday, the same as Friday. It’s just a name you put on to the nine-hour work shift you stay awake for. You come back home, pop a pill and wait for sleep to wash over you. It’s not sleep that the pills give you, it’s a temporary death. Your nights are lost; no dreams, no sensations to carry forward to the next day. Come morning and you’ll rise out of that underwater grave you’ve been under all night, try to summon all your resolve so you can fetch yourself a glass of water and take the pills. The pills will clear the thick cheese of fog in your head. And in two hours from now, you’ll be at your desk in front of the computer screen, glassy eyed and numb, but functioning.

To conform to this to allow your life to be governed by pills. You can’t give up on them now because now your brain craves the cocktail by 7:30 in the evening. It’s worse than being an alcoholic, you think. Craving a glass of whisky after a long work day seems like a better bargain. Cravings can be overcome. Besides, whisky makes you talk better, write better, feel better. These days you can’t have whisky because your meds will react to alcohol. So now you rush home, take your meds before your brain starts to do that thing where it feels like you’re being electrocuted. This is what shock therapy must feel like, you think. But it’s just your brain, asking for its fix. How did you get here?

And then there are the waking hours, the working hours. These are the hours you struggle through the most. You don’t argue with your editor when she asks you to tone down your political beliefs in your copy. You don’t so much as cheep a protest when marketing asks you to pull down a story, fearing the website might incur the wrath of the angry, anonymous masses that make up social media. Your office crush notices this, asks if you’re okay. You mumble something along the lines of ‘enh’ because you don’t know anymore. But you function and you comply.

“Bipolar Disorder”. That’s what your psychiatrist calls it. Not in so many words, but you prod and probe and he finally comes up with a solution. It means you will have phases of extreme highs and debilitating lows. You have a propensity to hypomania—that’s when you ramble and fidget and don’t sleep for nights on end. Those are the days when everything makes sense and you see connections where there weren’t any connections before, how morality is directly proportionate to personal levels of empathy, how Hillary Clinton’s presidency will affect the current state of journalism, how the crepuscular sunlight falling on your skin can light up your soul and make you a better human being, a demi-god even. And isn’t that the only thing we’re working toward with each passing hour, each passing day? That false sense of magnificence has a name, a diagnosis. It’s not normal. It’s bipolar disorder. And for you to be a functioning member of the society you must take the pills. It’s not just for you, it’s for those around you. It’s for the best.

You’re in the cab, on your way back home. You know the cab driver can see you cry in the rear-view mirror, even though you’re trying to supress the sobs and sniffles. You think you’re losing control over your life, you think you already might have. You think bipolar disorder is a death sentence. Your life is no longer yours. It belongs to the doctors and the pills. They decide when you wake up and how you look and what you say and what you write. They decide who you fall in love with and who you hate and whether you will be capable of hatred or love anymore. The pills will decide if you should get worked up about the tax reform or the subliminal form of censorship that is slowly but surely affecting your writing or Donald Trump’s hateful speeches that would drive you so mad earlier. Now, the pills will decide what you say or feel and you will comply.

So you reach home, let yourself in, pull out your latest prescription, a whole month’s worth stock of pills that cost you a quarter of your rent, head straight to the toilet and empty them out in the pot. The violent, turbulent sound of the flush is a little too loud today. 

