From: Vaishnavi Mudras<chimpukli10@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Dissenting Daughter
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Niti and Jaidev were the students of the same college since F.Y.J.C. They were the students studying in the same class in the year S.Y.B.Com. Jaidev was in love with Niti all these years and didn’t have the guts to propose her. Niti, a girl who wanted to live a happily ever-after with a man of her dreams was unaware of these feelings a guy had for her. She didn’t know him but was aware that there was a guy by the name of Jaidev in her class.

A day came when Jaidev was persuaded by his friends to propose the girl of his dreams. He decided to propose her. He proposed Niti, “I am in love with you since 11 th Standard. Today I am having the guts to say this to you. Will you be with me for life ?”. Niti looked at him and replied, ”I don’t know you. I need to think about this proposal. I will answer you next week.” “Okay’. Jaidev was happy thinking that his proposal was being given a thought of and he was ready to wait for a week. The inquiries about the guy were made by Niti and after thinking she said “Yes”.

The college couple was new in the town. The new couple had a budding romance. On individual level both of them were growing personally. They were brushing up their skills, taking part in festivals, competitions etc and this way their Bachelors got completed. They were on the verge of completing their Masters. The question of making known their relationship to their parents popped up. Niti, being an obedient child had already discussed with her parents. Her parents wanted to meet the guy. They met him and approved Niti’s choice and asked him to speak with his parents. Jaidev was now worried about his side of family. His being a joint family this seemed a difficult thing to achieve. His brother knew this but his brother made him understand that this was next to impossible. So, Jaidev decided to speak to his parents on his own. His parents listening to their child’s relationship disapproved to this match at the very first instance. The rest of the family members were in support of his parents. Thus, a problematic situation came into being.

Niti on the other hand informed him about her pregnancy. Niti broke the news that she was four months pregnant. On being asked about her family’s decision, he assured her that he was trying his best. He was happy with this news and didn’t have the heart to tell her the bad news. Further he was more concerned about her health. The news of his relationship created a different effect on his family. They started mounting pressure on him. He was being threatened that he would be debarred from the family property if he married that girl. His mother had taken a vow that she would kill herself if he came home marrying her. Jaidev frustrated with their pressure gave in and agreed with their choice. A girl got chosen by them. While on the other hand, he was the one taking Niti to the doctor’s clinic and spending for their upcoming child. He had made up his mind to bring the truth out after their baby’s birth. The day of his engagement drew closer and the nine months pregnancy period as well. The day clashed. Jaidev was to get engaged in the evening while a beautiful baby girl was born in the morning. Their friends attended the hospital to see Niti and her child. After seeing both of them healthy, they thought that this was the right time to speak about this and they told her the whole truth. They thought that this would stop Jaidev’s engagement. A wave of emotions passed through Niti’s heart and a decision was taken by her for her child.

She took the permission of the doctor to take her child out in the evening citing an emergency and she was discharged from the hospital. The first thing that she did was that she took her child to his engagement place. He saw Niti and their child standing on the door at the entrance. He ran from the stage with the thought of holding their child in his hands leaving the complexities of the situation behind. When he put forth his hand, he was stopped. Niti started “Stop. You aren’t allowed to touch my child. We were together ? You remember ? Didn’t you ever thought of confiding with me ? Ever ? I know you might have thought that my health might suffer. But what about my trust ?” His fiancée came in behind and looked at him with questioning eyes. He started replying ,” I will explain this to you Niti .Not here. Come we will talk…” Niti answered,” Your explanation won’t change my situation .I just came here for a thing. Do that for me.” Jaidev questioned “What ?” She replied “Fill this form for my daughter mentioning that you are her father. I don’t want my daughter to be known as an illegitimate child.” “Okay” He signed that form. After the thing got done she answered his whole family including him. “I am dissenting myself from marrying your son, Jaidev. Never ever me or my daughter step in this house under any circumstances.My daughter will have this person’s name till my husband comes and adopts my daughter. She would then known by my husband’s name for rest of her life. She would have got my name instead of him but this would serve as a reminder to you all that the girl you dissented to come as daughter in this house too dissented to become a daughter of this house and accepted a new father.” She left from there her eyes streaming with tears. The decision was tough but she was going to stand by that decision.

At the age of 70 years , Niti had a peaceful death. She had seen the ups and downs in her life. She had a loving husband. He loved their daughter. Her daughter had a love marriage. She had a caring son-in-law for her daughter “Sapna” and two grandchildren. Niti’s pyre was lit by her daughter who was convinced by her father. She left this world with her whole family behind. 

