From: Praveena Shivram<praveena.shivram@gmail.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Rat A Tat A Tat
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Presently, Maya turned into a rat.

It took her a full human-minute to figure this out, in which time she frantically scurried to the left and scurried to the right, always misjudging the distance and hitting her head against the wall till, quite naturally, she felt like she was spinning like a dying top, directionless and unsteady, till she stopped for a drink at one of the numerous puddles that seemed to dot her landscape and saw long, frisky whiskers tickling her cheeks under a dim, flickering light, and backed away slowly, realisation gracefully spreading over her little rat body, all the way to her twitching tail, like twilight on an evening sky.

She looked around, her hesitant eyes hiding behind her overactive nose, as the stench invading her being like a knife cutting up her insides made her whimper in distress.

 “Can she see us?” “Shut up.”

She froze when she heard those voices and tried to find its source, but she just couldn’t focus long enough with that tail continuously twitching behind her like an annoying child pulling the end of a sari. She turned her body to her extreme left, trying to keep the rest of her body still, and felt impossibly like a yoga guru on television.

“Oh, look at her go!” “Shut up!”

Maya snapped back and the momentum of that involuntary movement made her lose her balance and off she rolled like an errant peppercorn, stopped abruptly by a stern, tight-lipped PVC pipe. The distant laughter that had followed her stuck to her fur like lice and she wished she could shake them off.

“Now I know why she is the chosen one.”

A fat rat, flesh sagging beneath its body like old skin, stood in front of her. Next to this fat rat stood a scrawny one, grinning from ear to ear like a cracked pot that couldn’t hide its scars. Maya whimpered again.

“Oh, come on, don’t be scared. Come to papa, come on now.”

Maya felt like she was trapped in a lonely subway with nowhere to run or hide. But surely, that kind of thing doesn’t happen to rats! The fat one bared its teeth and snarled, and Maya ran, not registering anything except her tiny feet. She felt like she was gliding like a mighty eagle before it would swoop down on its prey, which reminded Maya that eagles eat rats, and she was a rat, and therefore this wasn’t a suitable metaphor for the moment.

She found an open pipe in the distance and wondered if she could fit into that tiny opening, but she had no time to think, with the fat one and scrawny one close behind her, the fat one continuously allowing unmentionable curses to escape between its huffing and heaving breath. Maya shot through the hole and was amazed at how her body seemed to go inward like a beating heart only to fill back into size once she was inside. She continued to run, till she realised that no one was following her, and yet, she could distinctly hear the fat one screaming.

“This stupid, goddamn pipe with its too small hole! I am stuck, you idiot, don’t push! And she is gone!”

Suddenly, Maya quite liked being this rat-self, cleverly (in retrospect) shaking off her pursuers. She was tempted to say something back, but as yet, she was afraid to speak (or squeak, she reminded herself).

She ambled along the pipe, almost as if she were on one of those mountain-side walks with delectable views impinging on the progress of the walk itself. Maya was fascinated by the rusty insides of the pipe, the nails in sporadic frequency coming out to say hello, the smell of stale onion inside unwashed socks sitting on her face like a gag, the squishy floor filled with ungainly blobs she would rather not think about, till she popped out, unexpectedly, and fell in an ungraceful heap in front of an army of rats.

“All hail the chosen one! All hail our saviour!”

The rats, about a thousand of them, fell to the floor, their whiskers and tails fluttering like coloured election flags. Clearly, they were waiting for Maya, and clearly they were waiting for her to do or say something, but Maya stood there, fascinated by yet another delectable view. She moved a step back and a collective ‘ah’ rose from the group. She moved forward and a collective ‘oh’ rose from the group. Maya did this a few times in slow motion, and then picked up speed, till the ‘ahs’ and ‘ohs’ merged with Maya’s rhythm and she was head-banging with the vigour of a hardcore fan at a heavy metal concert.

When she stopped, her energy spent but her body charged like a thousand-watt bulb, the crowd erupted into a loud cheer, rushed towards Maya, lifted her off the ground and passed her around like she was a weightless piece of stone. Maya felt tiny paws poke and tickle her in places she would rather not mention, and also, would rather not talk about the little sparks of pleasure coursing through her body.

Finally, the army of rats placed Maya gingerly at the mouth of yet another pipe, this one big enough to fit five fat rats at the same time, and then, as if they had all been nothing but an apparition, they disappeared.

Maya quickly felt the grip of fear clutch her heart and refused to turn around, painfully aware of the sneer of darkness behind her. She closed her eyes and prayed in silence when she heard scrawny rat’s voice

“Help me, help me, help me”

and felt the long and slimy body of a snake slither past her in great speed, heard scrawny’s voice cut out mercilessly like a particularly belligerent gardener cutting out weeds and felt the long and slimy body slither past her again as it went back inside the pipe in greater speed, knocking her out like a piece of rubbish.

When Maya opened her eyes, she found the army of rats in front of her, and this time, none of them looked like they wanted to do any hailing of the chosen one or dancing to the rhythm of her footsteps.

“Traitor! You sacrifice-escaping traitor!”

The menace in those words rose into the air like evaporated water – Maya could feel it in the increased density of air around her but she couldn’t see or touch it. She felt like she had been stripped naked and realised with the suddenness of a power cut in summer that she was already naked because she was a rat.

She turned around and ran blindly again, this time a thousand rats following her, baying for her blood. She ran over and under pipes and waded through slush and jumped over puddles till she saw sunlight trickling in like weak piss up ahead. She saw that piece of sunlight becoming wider and wider and realised with her still intact human intelligence that someone was opening out the manhole and soon someone would descend. She ran harder than before and finally used her voice.

“There are rats in here, thousands of them! Come and save me! Fast!”

Later, when Maya would be hiding in a dark corner of a sweetmeats shop, she would laugh at the ridiculousness of what she had said. She would remember how she scurried up the ladder as she saw a man’s foot rest on the first step; she would remember the army of rats following her without missing a beat; she would remember the man losing his balance and falling down the tunnel like Alice, into, well, a Wonderland of sorts; she would remember the other man outside dropping everything and running away, and she would remember the rats invading the traffic like water that had escaped the rigidity of banks, creating havoc with its newfound freedom.

She would remember the tyres screeching, the sirens blaring, the rats squished, the blood spilt, and the ones, like her, that had disappeared into dark corners of hope and chance, and she would remember the fat one still stuck inside.

And then, she would suckle on a piece of candy and fall into a deep, dreamless sleep. 

