From: Shebana Coelho<shebana@gmail.com>
Date: 09 December 2016 19:00
Subject: Sum Total
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

They’re walking, the two of them, arm in arm, one afternoon. Around them, soft sun, green lawns and sprinklers shooting water in arcs and lines. Though some houses have different-colored doors, and others stucco facades, mostly they are identical.

A gust of wind blows Leela’s straw hat into the road – right under the wheels of an oncoming car. Leela’s hand flies to her head; Mark makes a little sound and the car crunches over the hat and away. The driver smiles as he passes.

“I guess he didn’t see it,” Leela says “but I really loved that hat.” It had been a yellow hat with a sprig of dried flowers at the brim.

“I know.” Mark walks over to the tattered remnants. What was once the crown is now bits of straw. The brim is still intact but flattened with such force that it seems interlaced with the tar. When he turns around, his eyes are moist. Leela stares.

“Sorry,” Mark tries to laugh. But his cheeks are wet.





“But it is possible,” Mark says, “that’s what I do everyday – everyday I evaluate the sum total of a person’s life in thirty minutes or less.”

“Really,” Mahesh is new to the development. He’s just moved from Texas. “What exactly do you do?”

“Human resources,” Mark says. “I’m a recruiter.”

“Still,” Tarun says, “how well can you really know them in that time? I think – and that’s what my point is – I think it’s impossible to know anyone as well as yourself. I think the whole blood world is full of strangers and if you think any different, you’re living a delusion, I think if you think…”

“Darling,” Sunita puts her hand on her husband’s arm, “darling, let’s…”

“No, I’m not that drunk yet.” His cheeks are red, his eyes bright.

“We all are,” she giggles, “what else are these parties for?”

Mark smiles. What he’d like to say – but doesn’t because the moment has passed – is how, as the interviewees answer his questions, he imagines their lives on a clean white Cornell plate like the ones they got as wedding gifts, all the minutiae of work and love and loss piled on in little heaps – the best stuff, the stuff that shows they are stalwart and worthy, stacked high in the middle where he can see it.

“So,” Mahesh says, “you’ve really got a good crowd here.”

“Four D’mellos,” Tarun says, “counting Mark and Leela, seven Singhs, three Kulkarnis, two Sinhas, including us, and how many Hassans?”

“Two,” Sunita says. “But one of them is moving next week.”

“And a partridge in a pear tree,” Leela says.

“What is it?” Mark’s looking at Sunita.

“Nothing.” She giggles but the sound is different than before, higher pitched. She sips her wine awkwardly.

Mark is silent.

“Suni,” Tarun says, “don’t…” But she’s already hiccupping into tears.

“I did it last week,” she says and though she is speaking to everyone, she’s gazing straight at Mark. “All tied up,” she says, “and no tubes to go…no more pencils, no more books, no more children’s dirty looks… wait a minute, it’s teachers’ dirty…”

“Oh Sunita.” Leela takes her by the elbow. Sunita lets herself be led away.

Tarun’s cheeks grow redder. “Sorry,” he mutters, and walks towards the buffet table.

Mark looks down. He feels the wetness on face. A few drops slide down his cheeks into his glass.





“Christ!” Leela gets into bed. “What the hell was that?”

“I don’t know.”

“She didn’t even tell me she was going to have it done. And why was she staring at you like that? Did you know?”

“Of course not.” He hesitates and she hears it. “I think,” he says quickly, “she just needed to say it out loud and we just happened to be there.”

“You think it’s that simple?”

He knows it’s not.





He knows he’s not in control of the interview. The moment the guy walks in, he knows. He might as well forget the usual form: past job, reason for leaving, strengths, weaknesses, typing skills, position objectives.

His name is Juan Miguel Benitez; he’s 49, a janitor. He’s just returned from visiting his parents in the Dominican Republic. He has a big belly, and almond eyes with fringed lashes.

“Fresh milk,” he splays his legs and settles himself in the chair. “Fresh milk on my parents farm. And eggs straight from a hen, man, a hen. Pink flowers, green trees, no fuckin’ pollution, and at night, silence, dead fuckin’ silence. …”

They both stare at the desk between them.

“So - you want to know why I was fired?”

“I know why - your supervisor said you trashed the broom closet.”

“He’s a finicky faggot of a man. I’m mopping up and he’s over my goddamn shoulder, sitting on my goddamn shoulder going ‘that spot, this spot.’ Fix a faucet and he wants me to clean the whole pipe out. ‘It’s not the pipe man, I say, it’s the washer right here, see, the washer just needed a good tight screwing.’”

“I don’t have any openings,” Mark says. “I just placed one a few weeks ago - a nursing home in Queens.”

“Need the dough,” Juan says, “that farm, their bodies all going to hell, cataracts, emphysema, diabetes, high blood pressure…”

“I’ll try,” Mark says. “I will.”

 “Right,” Juan knows the routine. “Right.”

“No, I mean it.”

“Sure,” Juan says.

Mark cancels his other interviews for the day. It’s embarrassing as two of them have already arrived and he has to tell them in person. He skips lunch and spends the rest of the day making calls. In the evening, he calls Leela, tells her he’s missed the last bus, and will take a car service later, ignoring the rebuke in her voice as she says okay, and to get home safe.

Then he goes through old files, makes more calls. In the end, when he’s exhausted all his leads, he calls the supervisor at home. He apologizes for Juan. The supervisor says it won’t do, he needs an apology in person.

“Come on,” Mark says, “can’t you let it go? Life’s too short…”

“Life’s too short to work with that asshole.” The supervisor ‘s voice is tight and nasal. “No way.”

“I’ve seen your file,” Mark says. “You haven’t had anyone stay longer than four months, Juan was there five. If you can’t work with him, I can’t get you anyone new, not anyone that can last, not at the rate you’ve been…”

“Is this legal?” the supervisor says, “I don’t think it’s legal what you’re saying. You can’t talk to me like that.”

“Please,” Mark says, “all I’m asking is that you give someone a break, that you get over whatever it is that’s been nagging you for years. It’s your ex-wife isn’t it? I see part of your salary’s been appropriated for years now. It’s over, let it be, why don’t you try to get over it, why don’t you….”

The supervisor hangs up. Mark collapses into his chair.





“Mark, the chair.”

“What?”

“It won’t take our weight.”

“It will—come here.”

“Let’s go the bedroom.”

“No, I can’t wait.” His eyes blaze fiercely at her, over her. “I love you.”

“Mark.”

His body is trembling. His chest, his heart beating fiercely against hers.

“Mark.” She feels him move, feels herself move, feels the chair groan as they move. His face is…leonine, she thinks dazedly, that’s the adjective I’m looking for.

Afterwards, she takes deep breaths, but she can’t get anything back to normal. He’s lying on the floor. His eyes are closed and he looks as dazed as she feels, his hands trembling like hers.

“It’s never been like this.”

He opens his eyes slowly. “No it hasn’t.”

“It was too much.”

“Was it?” His face is so unguarded, it makes her flinch.

“Yes.” She sits up in the chair. The afternoon sun fills the room. The heat is palpable, the humidity crowding in through the open windows, flaying her skin with sweat so she feels thinned out. “What are you doing home so early?”

“I was fired,” he says.

“What?”

“Fired.” He smiles. “Just like that.”

“What happened?”

 “I was…” his eyes are calm, “over-eager about getting someone a job. And they’re suing me too.”

“For what?”

“I don’t know exactly-they’re sending papers in the mail.” He sits up, looks towards the window. Once she took pride in how well they read each other – like those gestures in Bharat Natyam, a certain splaying of fingers and hands, a certain leg tilt, hip flex that could be a cobra or a chariot or a God but to a trained eye, was unmistakably one or the other.

But now, it feels like an army is preparing itself for war under her skin. She can almost hear the battle cries, the clinking of heavy armor, the pawing of steeds.

 Meanwhile, here’s Mark’s defenseless back, turned away from her.





“Turn it down,” Tarun is saying, “please. I’ll even take elevator music. Just no more of this rapping business.”

It’s a real carnival, this Labor Day picnic. Everyone’s crowded into the cul-de-sac in front of Sunita’s house – some sitting in plastic chairs, others standing in clusters. There are grandmothers in saris, grandfathers in kurtas, fathers in khaki shorts, mothers in long sundresses, boys in baggy hip-hop pants, girls in tank tops. Also, toddlers in playpens, teenagers in the makeshift DJ booth and Tarun pleading – without success – for a change of music.

 Also, four smoking grills and beside them, four tables with pot-luck roasted things, curried things, grilled things, deviled things, deep friend things, freshly tossed things, chocolat-ey baked things. And also: bottles of wine, whiskey, gin, vodka, and beer, set up on two parallel tables in the middle of which stand Mark and Tarun serving.

“So good,” Sunita says, “so good to see you both out.”

She’s commandeered Mark as soon as they arrived. “Tarun’s useless at this,” she says. “Need someone who knows what they’re doing. Need a Catholic.”

“We haven’t see you for ages.” Tarun hands Leela a gin and tonic, more gin than tonic. “You’ve been hiding ah?”

“Just busy.” Leela motions to the crowd. “The whole world showed up.”

“Leela,” Mala Kulkarni approaches with a plate in her hand. “Is this your salad?” She has a brusque manner – it sounds like an accusation.

“Yes,” Leela says. “It is.”

“Hmm,” Mala says but she’s looking elsewhere – she’s watching her mother-in-law sitting a few feet away, trying to balance a paper plate of food on her lap. The plate falls. As she exclaims and bends to pick it up, the flap of the sari falls into the food. Mala grimaces and turns back to Leela.

“It’s great,” she impales a chunk of lettuce with her fork. “Absolutely the best thing here.” She chews vigorously.

“Thanks,” Leela glances over at Mark – he’s talking to Tarun, his face relaxed. She walks across to the opposite pavement where the new arrival, Mahesh and his wife – god what’s her name? – are waving her over.

“So, all moved in?” Leela says.

“Almost,” The wife has black hair and enormous brown eyes. “Thanks for asking.”

“Good to hear,” Leela says.

She looks over at the liquor table. Even from this distance, she can see that Mark’s face is wet. He’s listening to Tarun who’s moving his hands wildly as he talks.

Mahesh hiccoughs loudly.

“Mahesh!” his wife blushes. “Sorry,” she says “We’ll get some food and come right back.” Mahesh hiccoughs again, bows unsteadily to Leela and they walk away toward the food tables.

Now Tarun’s head is bowed. Sunita is walking swiftly away. Mark steps after her and speaks. His face is intent, as if nothing else exists but her, the back of her head. Sunita stops, listens. Now everyone is watching avidly. Sunita turns back, faces her husband. She says loud enough for Leela to hear, “you bastard, you goddamn bastard, you bastard, you goddamn bastard.”

Leela can’t look away. Within minutes, envoys who have been within earshot, are passing through the party, whispering:

Tarun’s just confessed to having had affairs. Something about blond waitresses. Sunita was about to leave but Mark talked her out of it. God, did you see her face, poor woman, she can’t stop yelling.

What about him? Don’t you think he’s suffered being married to her?

Have you once seen her hugging that man?

Listen, how she is in public and how she is in private are two different things.

What does it matter, when something ends, it’s horrible .

Just look at her face…

Just look at his face….

And a few minutes later:

You know Mala left Mrs. Kulkarni behind when they went to Disneyland last year? For a whole week!

I know mother-in-laws are a pain but really, this is beyond cruel.

And her own son didn’t – I mean, Vinod let it happen. 

Only because Mala made up an excuse about the mother having some event at the senior center.

The kids cried when they were leaving – she still did it.

Poor woman, she barely speaks English, doesn’t drive.

Mala’s face, the guilt—my god, to look at someone carrying around so much guilt…

And later:

Mahesh was abused as a child…

Mahesh who?

The new guy, the one who moved into...

Oh Mahesh.

Some uncle.

His mother knew.

His wife was barely looking at him – did you see that?

Wouldn’t you be embarrassed if your husband …

Yes, but still…

Look at his face…

This is what the occasion has been waiting to become. How else, Leela thinks, to explain the speed with which these confessions are spreading? It’s as if an invisible current has been circulating through the party all afternoon in the guise of good cheer when really it’s been livid and hungry – and waiting for Mark’s company to make itself known. They’ve all been deceived.

Leela closes her eyes. Because when she listens, it still sounds like a party. Music, children, raised voices, lowered voices, exclamations, whispers. But when she opens her eyes, she sees how her husband stands a few feet away, his entire body aligned away from her, his head bent, listening. How he doesn’t look up at her.

After a while, it doesn’t matter because as she looks at him, she sees only the faces beyond him, only the raw conversations around him, only people either reeling towards his company, or reeling from having been in it. Each story branding its teller with an epithet. Like the curve of Sunita’s lips, parted – that small gap into which betrayal hurtles. Or Mahesh’s bleary gaze, averted – shame glancing off sideways into space. Or Mala’s hoarse voice, scratched with guilt.

Leela watches silently. She sees Mala kneel at the feet of her mother-in-law; she sees Sunita yelling at Tarun, then getting into the car and driving away; she sees Mahesh walking dazedly into the path of the car. She hears the screech of Sunita’s tires, the dull thump of a body falling, the screams of people running towards Mahesh, and the wail of sirens coming and going with Mahesh, his broken leg, his stunned wife, and a devastated Sunita in tow.

She looks for Mark and finds him, standing off to the side. The sun is setting behind him—she can’t see his face. But he still has the breadth and girth of her husband of many years. Leela walks towards him. Of course she’s crying.

