From: Hari Ram Narayanan<gigahari@gmail.com>
Date: 09 December 2016 19:00
Subject: The Scarlet Macaw
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

No person has uttered my full name correctly in the first attempt. During each introduction, I’ve silently and desperately hoped this trend gets broken, but I’ve only met with disappointment. This is because I have a most unusual name and here’s how I ended up with it.

My grandfather, a colonel in the army hailing from Punjab, was named Vidhur Virbahadur. He has two sons, my uncle Vikram Virbahadur and my father Virat Virbahadur. Both of them enlisted in the armed services as well. You should also see the pattern with the names emerging. So when my father married my mother, an anglo Indian named Victoria, going against family traditions, many questioned if it was out of love or out of an obsession for rhyming names.

He pushed things a notch further up when I was born. He gave me the name, ‘Vrimrur.’ And he threw in my grandfather’s name too for good measure, making my full name a tongue twister that goes Vrimrur Vidhur Virbahadur. (Saying it aloud a few times now, will help your cause, as you go further.)

The problems began right from my birth. My uncle Vikram tells me, in my early days my mother took to calling me the nickname, ‘Vimroo.’ My father vehemently objected to this and made sure she pronounced my name clearly uttering all the ‘r’s it contained. As a teenager, I joined a club of local dirtbikers, who raced each other on dusty, untended tracks. This lead to my friends conferring upon me the onomatopoeic title ‘Vroom.’ When my father heard the boy next door -- a stout and bubbly character named Sriram -- summon me thus, with perhaps more authority than he exercised in the military, ordered the poor chap to use my given name.

Even when people wished to addressed me as mandated, they fumbled mostly missing one or more of the ‘r’s. When they got this part right, they struggled to put it together with the rest of the names. My father would have none of it. He corrected everyone and made them say the whole thing repeatedly until they got it right. He made all my friends do it, he made my mother’s European cousin Gloria do it, he even once made the General of the Indian Army do it.

Needless to say, when my younger sister was born, another name was coughed up to fit the pattern. Let me not burden you with all the trials that ensued then, but fast forward to our teenage days. My sister always seemed to be in a trance during this time. She dressed in clothes with abstract patterns and oblique lines. Her hair was a messy mass of spirals. So I took to calling her ‘Vortex.’ My father did object to this initially, but he had softened a little by then and didn’t insist.

I think I was fourteen when Sriram and I went to the fair. It had the usual ferris wheels, cotton candies, and bangle stalls. A bunch of acrobats performed their acts. You could win prizes by shooting balloons or take home toys by throwing hoops around them. But what caught our attention was the macaw.

Next to a tent was a huge poster announcing a wager. Samrat, the macaw had a rare ability, it said. You could stand before him and utter your full name loudly once, and he would repeat it as such. An attempt cost just rupees ten. If the bird got it right, you got back nothing. But should he fail, the reward was Samrat himself; the magnificent bird was yours to keep!

Sriram and I entered, paying just for a single attempt. ‘If he gets your name, he will surely get mine,’ he said. Inside, a curtain partitioned the tent into two. We saw a tall man with a giant, red turban and a pointed, grey mustache.

'Please come in, I am the owner of Samrat,' he said, bringing together his hands in a namaste.

I wanted to give him a warning of what he was up against.

'Hello, nice to meet you. You see,I have a slightly uncommon name and people often have problems with it. It goes...'

'No need to tell me,' the man said stopping me in mid-sentence. 'In this tent, you will say your name once, and that will be to Samrat. And if you can state it, he can certainly repeat it. There is no doubt. He has dealt with Russian and Polish tourists, so your name should not be a bother.'

'Ok.’

'Are you ready?'

'Yes.'

He pulled a rope and the curtain went up. Behind it hung a bronze cage and a gap in the canopy above let in a sunbeam creating a natural spotlight. The bird within, from head to tail looked half as tall as his formidable owner. And he was textured in hues that could rival the most audacious painter’s palette; grey and black on his beak and claws, a blob of white around his eyes, bands of yellow, green, and blue feathers, and of course the rich scarlet everywhere else.

He began turning his head in our direction, but for some reason stopped halfway through, staring into nothingness. There was a nonchalance in his manner that was contrasting to the vividity in his form.

The man in the turban showed a gesture asking to me to proceed. I filled my lungs with air and announced,

'VRIM - RUR - VIDHUR - VEER - BAHADUR’

With a wide smile, Samrat’s owner extended his arms towards the bird. He was a magician and this was his moment of prestige.

A while passed. There was only silence. He moved closer to the bird. The macaw only made a purring sound:

'Hrrrrrrr… Brrrrrrr…'

'Oh, so you don’t want to do this anymore, is it?' he asked.

'Should I try again?' I asked him.

'There is certainly no need,' the reply came with unexpected force, 'the message is amply clear; the great Samrat has had enough of silly games. It is time to move on.'

He separated the cage from the rope that held it in his hamds.

'He is yours for now. But I win the wager, anytime he says your name. If this happens, you have to return him to me. Is that understood?'

'What? How can I do that?' I mumbled unable to come to grips with what was happening, 'I mean, how do I even know where to find you?'

'There is no need to worry about that. Just set him free and he will find me.'

Even as I stood, head tilted, mouth gaping in bewilderment, he thrust the cage onto me and walked out.

When I eventually brought him home, the reception was mixed. Vortex was aloof, probably jealous to hear I had won a prize. My father looked at the whole episode with suspicion. However, my mother bought the bird different things to eat. And my grandfather kept walking around the cage calling out, though its occupant kept turning away.

I worried, what if he was in a bad mood or unwell that day. What if he recovered and started calling out everyone’s name? To stay true to my word, I would have to set him free, but was that a smart thing to do? This concern was allayed as a few days passed with nothing more than the purr coming out.

Sriram came up with the theory that the man had wanted to get rid of the bird all along, and had fabricated this special gift idea just to make things simple. That did sound believable to me. How could he suddenly go mute? So Sriram proposed that we make an attempt to teach the bird to speak.

'But how do we do that?' I asked.

'Leave that to me. I did some research and have learnt all about it,' he replied. 'You begin with simple words. Repeat them over five minute sessions three times a day. Then we give him rewards when the sounds he makes begin approaching the words. And in no time, he will be belting out many of them.'

This did sound encouraging. Sriram turned up for the sessions bang on time. He brought with him a lunchbox filled with pomegranate berries. He kept repeating the simple words, ‘Hello,’ ‘Good Day,’ ‘Thank you,’ ‘Sriram’… but Samrat only purred and purred; no sound that remotely approached human speech was issued. The five minutes slowly increased to fifteen and then thirty. Sriram began emphasising his words with body language. He smiled, he waved, he cranked his neck inverting his head like he’d seen birds do, he even did a somersault, but Samrat remained totally unimpressed.

'Oh man, this is not working,' he cried out one day in exasperation. 'I think he is deaf or dumb or severely dyslexic or something.'

'Do you think we should take him to a vet for a check up?'

'Good idea.'

Immediately, an appointment was scheduled. The veterinary doctor turned out to be a short, elderly man with a flowing white beard. He pressed Samrat at different places with his fingertips. Using a thin torch he examined, the bird’s eyes, ears, and mouth. He then listened to the pulse with a Stethoscope. Samrat submitted to all this offering no resistance. It was as if he’d been through it several times.

'He is absolutely fine,' declared the vet finally, 'As good as any bird can get.'

'What?' cried out Sriram. 'Then why does he never say anything?'

'I think he just prefers to keep silent. Be nice to him and make him happy. Maybe he’ll get into a chatty mood!'

Sriram said nothing more there. Once home, he floated the possibility that the problem may not be with the bird, but with the cage.

‘Come on, I’d be depressed if I was locked in all day,’ he said

His parents were both avid gardeners and maintained a greenhouse of their own. The view here of the open sky, he felt, must encourage any bird to take to wings. The large enough space must provide enough room to fly around. And yet, the glass walls would make sure he would not escape. So we took him there and opened the cage. However, Samrat showed no inclination to step out. Even when I took him out by hand and set him down, he ambled around slowly and sat down.

That was it. Sriram decided it was time to give up. Once back home, my grandfather made one more attempt.

'Say salute,' he thundered with his nose almost touching the cage. The response was usual.

'Hrrrrrrr… Brrrrrrr...'

'I order you, say Salute.'

'Hrrrrrrr… Brrrrrrr...'

'Listen cadet, this is Colonel Vidhur Virbahadur and I am not used to anyone disobeying my orders. Say Salute.'

'Hrrrrrrr… Brrrrrrr…'

‘Damn you!’

With that, everyone resigned to the fate that they had to live with a bird that would never talk.

Four years passed in this fashion. Then, one stormy afternoon, Vortex brought home a tiny black and white kitten that was stranded in the rain. He looked all disheveled and helpless and gobbled in several saucers-full of milk. He slept for the whole of the rest of the day and then through the entirety of that night. When he woke up the next morning, he was a different beast.

Vortex named him Vismay, the wonder, the wow being. And true to his name, he seemed mysterious in many ways. He was never at the same place, when you looked away and turned back again. He materialised from least expected corners, at least expected times. From the depths of the cushions on the sofa, just when you were about to sit, from behind the cutlery in the showcase when you wiped the glass, from inside the gumboot, just before you put your foot in, from within the soiled clothes basket, just when you were about to throw in a towel, emerged Vismay, the wonder.

And he made such a variety of sounds, a hundred different squeaks, a hundred different purrs, and a hundred different meows. What came when you scratched his chin was not what came when you rubbed his back. What came when you fed him fish was not what came when you poured him milk. What came when you spanked him in anger was not what came when you stepped on his tail by accident. A different cry for each occasion, Vismay the wonder.

Our two pets seemed to be the antithesis of each other. I assumed they understood it too, and that is why neither acknowledged the other. Vismay who sniffed and scratched every other nook and cranny of our house, somehow never went near Samrat’s cage. And the kitten’s sudden inclusion into our family and all the commotion that this resulted in, seemed to make no difference whatsoever to the macaw.

A couple of years passed in this fashion. Samrat remained the same, but Vismay grew into an adult tomcat. I presumed size was the only thing that changed.

I realised how wrong I was one evening, when all of a sudden, Vortex let out a deafening scream. I was in a bedroom and ran to the hall where the noise had erupted. When I saw what had caused this, I froze in horror.

Vismay had somehow snapped open the door to Samrat’s cage. He was now half inside and in his jaws held the bird by his neck.

I recovered in an instant and rushed towards them yelling as loudly as I could. This seemed to have frightened Vismay enough. In the time it took me to cover the next few paces, he left the bird, pulled himself out of the cage, sprang down and ran away.

I immediately examined Samrat. The teeth had left their mark, but much to my surprise, they hadn’t cut him. Samrat was unhurt physically, but he was clearly traumatized. His eyes popped out and he gasped heavily with mouth open. I gave him water to drink and sat holding on to him for a long time. It didn’t seem to help much. As night came, I moved his cage to my bedroom. Before I went to bed, I locked the doors and windows to make sure nothing could sneak in.

The next morning, I awoke to find Samrat in a different state. His eyes seem to have a fresh gleam of determination. Not a shadow of the previous day’s alarm remained. I brought his cage back to the hall and placed it on a table.

Vortex was there sprawled on the couch.

'What do we do now?' she asked. I had no ready answer. Had we to part with Vismay? Would there be some way to keep him and ensure Samrat would be safe?

There was a long silence. It broke when I heard my name being uttered clearly.

'VRIM - RUR - VIDHUR - VEER - BAHADUR'

Vortex was in front of me and hadn’t opened her mouth. There was no one else in the room. Had I just imagined it? It came again.

'VRIM - RUR - VIDHUR - VEER - BAHADUR'

The tone was shrill but the enunciation was perfect. Each ‘R’ was clear. My father would have had no modifications to suggest. And yes, the sound came from the cage. As I stepped closer, it happened again. And this time, I saw it with my own eyes,

'VRIM - RUR - VIDHUR - VEER - BAHADUR'

As I have told you, no person has uttered my name correctly in the first attempt. But Samrat the scarlet macaw, who had lived silently with us for six years now, had suddenly achieved this feat.

‘What just happened?’ asked Vortex, sitting bolt upright.

‘Wait a minute! So this means you lost your wager, right?’ she resumed, taking stock. ‘And you told me you had to set him free if he this happened.’

‘Yes.’

‘But are you going to do it?’

What seemed like a pointless agreement now gleamed with new significance. Maybe the bird was special after all, and had said my name knowing it should lead to freedom. Or maybe, this was just a side effect of having gone through a near death experience. There was only one way to find out, and that was by giving him a chance. Samrat had made no attempts to fly away the previous times we had opened his cage. And so, once again, I undid the latch and opened the door.

'Thank you,' said the macaw. The suddenness, clarity, and authority, with which the words came, made me jump back. Samrat flew straight out and perched on the grill of an open window.

‘Goodbye,’ he said before taking off into the air.

‘Oh no, are we just going to let him go like that?’ asked Vortex.

No, I had to follow this to its conclusion. My dirt bike still lay in the garage.

‘Call me Vroom,’ I told my sister as I made my way towards it.

I spotted Samrat in the air and began following him on my bike. Vortex came along the pillion. Initially, he flew right above the road and was easy to keep up with. But then, we had to go bouncing over uneven terrain and then navigate our way through narrow lanes on a slum that had all sorts of things strewn over. And here we lost sight of him.

 ‘This sucks! What do we do now?’ asked Vortex.

‘He was always headed straight in this direction’ I said pointing, ‘I think if we keep going, we have a chance.’

The landscape changed again and we saw lush paddy fields on both sides. In their midst, a lake emerged. Its placid waters glimmered silver under the searing sun. Behind this, we saw a high mound with a hut on top of it. In front of the hut a stump shot out that turned to become horizontal at shoulder height. And on this, we saw a huge bird perched.

I couldn’t see how I could ride there. I dropped my bike down and ran through the fields.

As I got closer, things became clearer. The bird was certainly Samrat.

I stood before him heaving and panting. ‘You did it, we found him,’ said Vortex joining me, patting my back.

The door of the house opened silently and out came a tall man. He wore a giant red turban and had a pointed, grey mustache. Yes, he was the same man who had given me Samrat. And he hadn’t changed one bit.

‘So we meet again,’ he said as though expecting us.

‘Yes, he was silent all these years,’ I said looking at Samrat. ‘Didn’t say a word, didn’t even make much noise. But today he uttered my name. Clearly. Thrice.’

‘That means you lost. Now, didn’t I tell you, he won’t find it hard?.’

I stood not knowing how to respond.

‘Don’t you also want his cage?’ asked Vortex.

‘Cage him, make him play my games, treat him like a puppet; only so that he leaves me again. No, you can keep the cage. I will give him care and shelter. But he will now be free.... You can keep the cage. He is Samrat, the emperor. And he will live like one.’

