From: Zafar Abbas<zafar.4040@gmail.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Tara
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Her convulsive laughter was hard to go unnoticed. She sat with my mother and laughed on a joke that she herself cracked. Well, I mean not with my mother exactly. She actually sat on the floor while my mom sat with a silver coloured paandaan on the square takht placed at the center of the veranda. The window of my study room was big enough to let the womanly gossips sneak in. Sometimes it was more interesting than “The Lady or the Tiger” chapter in my English textbook. I often failed to resist the temptation to peep from the window curtain to see the facial expressions of Tara while she narrated the stories weaved with emotions. Sometimes I saw my mother wrapping a white paper around a green paan and handing it over to Tara cautiously. Tara was cautious too in wrapping her saree pallu meticulously on her fingers before taking the paan.

I was young when Tara was introduced to our family by ‘Bhoodha’. Bhoodha was an old human scavenger who worked at our house even before I was born. She was an old lady who rarely talked. She carried a broom, an iron trash picker along with a wooden basket as her tools . She often kept to herself and rarely opened up. Her facial features were lost into wrinkles and often you have to struggle finding her face amongst those scattered zig zag lines. Nobody remembered her young in our locality and those countless wrinkles got her the name Bhoodha. Though she was never swift but then one day I do remember her feet tremble more and she struggled to climb the stairs where the dry pit toilet was made. One summer afternoon she almost fainted, my reflex gave me a sudden jerk but as the message was conveyed to my brain I was jammed. However, somehow she managed not to fall adjusting her wooden basket on her waist. I was more than relieved. The next day she came with a young lady and introduced her in a bleak voice ‘ I am getting weak now. She is my daughter- in- law Tara, from tomorrow she will carry on.’

Tara was around thirty. She had sharp features with wheetish complexion. Her dressing sense was amazing. Her bindi and bangles always matched the saree she wore. Unlike Bhoodha, she was a chatterbox. Infact, after she was done with her work, she sat on the floor to chat with my mother. She was a chalta phirta news channel in doordarshan era. Infact, she had more Breaking News than todays best news channels. It wouldn’t be wrong if I call her our mole in the neighbourhood. We knew why Mrs. Pandey was not returning from her maika, when Mr. Fayyaz is planning to get her only daughter married; why the constable came to Mr. Verma’ s house and what is Bablu actually doing when he is pretending to study at his rooftop.

‘My devrani and jethani are too shrewd.’ She said as she stuffed the pan inside her mouth ‘ They intentionally bump into the dupattas and sarees of Laxmi hanging on that thin wire tied across North pole and South pole of her house. They know if they touch those, Laxmi would gift those they touched on any pretext. They have 5 chiffon sarees now.” She was down laughing even before she completed, barely managing to keep the red liquid inside her mouth.

The community of the human scavengers resided approximately one kilometer from our house. A cluster of kachha- pakka houses. Some made in the hut shape with brick coloured khaprail roof and a few with concrete. Some were even in worst conditions with just a broken mud wall separating the inmates from the glares of the strangers on the road. They visited our places everyday but they never had any guests. Whenever I passed that locality my cycle slowed down a bit for here lived a woman who visited our house almost every day and shared all those lovely stories with my mother. Before the cycle could stop, something inside me triggered my legs to paddle faster and soon the locality would vanish in a dot.

‘If ever you touch them by mistake just put your middle finger on top of your index finger. That would save you ’ told one of my classmates as she enacted the exercise as a free demo for me. She managed it so easily with her soft and tender white fingers.

If I was at home I was supposed to open the latch of the door when Tara arrived. I could even distinguish her style of door knocking than others. As my ears heard a familiar style I knew I have to get out of my study room. ‘ Namaste’ I greeted her as I opened the door apart.. She smiled back. I waited till she came back to open the door again. Sometimes the trail of smell she carried back was simply unbearable.

It was a hot summer afternoon and after having dal chawal I was repeatedly getting the value of X and Y wrong. The digits in algebra book were slowly becoming blurred. I laid my head on the table to rest a little. Soon in my dreams someone was sobbing, wait ,it took me some seconds to realise it wasn’t a dream and a minute to realise it was Tara. I slowly moved towards the window.

‘ It has been 2 years now. My life is becoming hell. All doctors have refused. They say I cant have a baby.’

My mother was serious too and her hands slowed down to apply kattha on the pan she was preparing for her.

‘ Bhoodha asks her son to remarry. She wants a grandson. My husband loves me but he too his helpless. I see my husband’s face, I know he is not happy but smiles to keep me in spirits. I don’t know for how long this will go on. I have limits and I can’t bear this more. ’

I tried peeping from the curtain. She sat on the floor rubbing her eyes with her pallu. My mom tried diverting her ‘ Forget it Tara. Have faith. Take this’ my mother stretched her hand with the pan in the white paper. As she stretched her hand to take paan I got a chance to notice her eyes. They were bloodshot, red and swollen.

Keeping the paan in her mouth she continued.

‘ You know what I have been to. I haven’t spared a mazaar or temple to pray. I don’t care who tells me, what religion he belongs to, if they say this shrine can help you having a baby, I visit the place.’ Her eyes were still wet.

‘ Once I have been to a tantrik. I feel shy to even tell you what he asked me to do. I ran out. I cried the whole night, People, are trying to take advantage of me’

‘ I don’t know why God is doing this to me, as if making me a human scavenger wasn’t enough.’ She sobbed.

That day I was so disturbed that I didn’t get the algebra right. They have been into enough misfortune. She and her community.

Some months later, Tara stopped coming to our house. The old lady took over again. ‘Why isn’t Tara coming.’ I asked my mother. ‘She is ill’ my mother gave a short blank reply.

A few months later as I cycled through that locality my head turned towards those kaccha pakka houses. I was looking for Tara and suddenly I saw Tara. She sat there on a cot with two teenage girls oiling her hair. In a few seconds my cycle moved some more meters, as I paddled I saw her for one more time and I knew she was definitely not ill.

Bhoodha broke the news of the child birth. Tara was blessed with a boy. Finally her prayers were answered.

 Tara resumed work after some months. She was so excited. Her life has completely changed.

‘ What’s the name of the child’ my mother asked. ‘ Munna’ Tara gave the much expected reply with a grin.

After an year as I was washing my bicycle one day, she came and kept the basket outside ‘Tomorrow is Eid and I will come to take my inam’ she smiled as she looked at my mother. My mother nodded.

‘Bring Munna along too’ was the request. ‘ Munna would be an year old now’ my mother confirmed. Tara nodded.

On the day of Eid we had too many guests. Usually it was the men who visited in the morning and ladies at the evening or night. As some ladies of the neighbourhood sat with my mom with the *shakoras* of sheer and sewaiyas I heard a familiar knock. I opened the door. It was Bhoodha. The old lady stepped in. I was wondering how could Bhoodha imitate Tara’s style of knocking. Surprised, I started to close the door when I heard a familiar voice.

 ‘ Bhaiya…ruko’ Tara was there a bit hesitant and shy as she wore a red saree with glittering embroidery at the borders. The silver rings in her hand and bichwa in the toe sparkled in the dark. She did carry the small baby in her arms.

As most of the ladies knew Tara they decided to give Tara 10 rs each as inam. They too made sure that they held the very edge of the note. Meanwhile as my mom got busy pouring the sewaiyan into Tara’s steel dabba, the toddler managed to slip away from her arms and touched one lady’s dupatta that was hanging down from the bed. The lady shrieked. The remaining advised her to wash the dupatta with water. Before Tara could understand anything, Munna was already crawling towards me. It was barely a few seconds for me to take a decision. Should I back off, away from the reach of the child ? All the guests were staring me as he crawled closer. From the corners of my eyes I could see a lady signaling me to move back. Their faces dropped as the baby inched further. Spoons held to their mouth waiting for my reflexes to come into effect.

With each passing second the pressure on me to act was increasing.The baby stretched his little hand stretching it towards me. Munna’s tender fingers touched my toe, the sensation thrilled me. As the toddler rolled his fingers between my slippers and toe, my legs freezed but hands moved downwards. I bent down and touched the baby with my hands. I held him tightly by his arms and lifted the chubby baby. Munna understood the gesture and was smiling. I swung him high in the air as I heard ‘ awwww’ sounds in the background. Good thing was my fingers were not crossed. 
