From: Nilesh Shrivastava<nileshs123@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Blood
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Its noon and the sun is cruel. The petrol station on the highway is starkly empty of people – but not empty of the smell of leftover oil, or two listless trucks left vacant in a hurry, one motorcycle lying stranded on the ground, the terrifying aura of violence and growing stain of flowing blood. The color of red gradually mixing with spots of oil to make a palette that is at once, stark and yet confused.

I flow for a minute unhindered, slipping like a snake away from the body that’s now behind me – lying listless and wasted. The small crevices in the tarred floor of the petrol station guide me and then block me but I flow – till the force of a dying heart pumps me out for the last few seconds. I know I will flow a little more while the ground absorbs me and the sun dries me out. I will be spent but I will not be wasted.

Till today I was the power in that man’s veins - the one who sat on his motorcycle and religiously covered the distance between the big city and next largest temple town - stopping by at every petrol station on the highway. His thin frame was weak - prone to bouts of cold and shivering every now and then. He would drape himself with a jacket even at the mildest sign of chill or stop for an hour under some sweet shop just to avoid a mild drizzle. It was a job but going back and forth on the same road, day in and day out, and gradually it became a duty. There was a big oil company behind him and people in the office in the city before whom, I could sense, he would stiffen up and whom he would avoid as much as he could. It was a choice between the open highway road and the stuffy, overbearing office in the center of the market. The road always won.

The role was simple. Hit the road and pause at every petrol station of the big oil company. Check the inflow and outflow numbers and ever so often, test the quality of the oil and then once every few days report back to office. He was a young and this was the first job after a dreary education. There was hope and aspiration to do a good job. Make an impression. Be known.

The first few months were learning and knowing – the methods, the people, the culture, the hierarchy. The people in the office were cold and busy. The ones on the road were warm but business minded. It was not a hard job and I could sense comfort building up – and he said as much on the phone to the family and friends far away.

The first time he saw the adulteration in the tanks of the petrol station, he almost ignored it. Must be a mistake. The man at the petrol station shrugged casually when he mentioned it. Then it happened again the next day and then again the following day. The man at the station would shrug and do nothing else. He spoke to the boss at the office and with one look, he was told to ignore it. Keep to your job – he was told. It was a strange and confusing feeling - being right and wrong at the same time

The confusion cleared the next day. The man at the petrol station gave him a packet. He opened it and there was cash – more than his salary, he could see. Almost instinctively, he returned it back. I do not need this, he says. There is something deeply wrong, he thinks.

He raised the matter again at the office, unsure of the reaction. The boss looked at him, this time angrily. Donate the cash or keep it – it doesn’t matter, he was told, but don’t return it. The wheels must turn and you keep to your job – he hears the words again. He goes home – very uncomfortable, very disturbed. I could sense it – as I ran hard through him. In the evening, in the middle of the night and then again all day – the throbbing sensation would not let go.

Few days later, he called home again – talking hastily, missing words, sometimes whispering, sometimes almost shouting. There is hesitation at the other end, and concern. This was such a good job. Should he leave it at the first sign of trouble, they ask or should he do as the boss says. Is it right to do as others bid or right to hold on? They argue for a while and then he says – I will decide. Take care, they say, take good care for you are far from home.

He goes to work as usual. Taking care of the elements and the sniffling nose – with a jacket and a tablet once in a while. But his mind is elsewhere – I can sense clearly. He speaks to peers in his office, in general terms and through vague questions. The answers come with mysterious smiles and some sympathy. It’s the way of the world – they tell him, those who have gone through it before him. Who minds a little extra cash – they tell him and in the big scheme of life – looking away for a while does not matter. It does matter, he thinks but does not speak. He simply nods. It’s much bigger than you and me – they tell him and the choices are limited. Participate actively or participate passively – there is no other option. There is no walking away if you want to keep the job. Make peace, they say. The sooner the better. It’s not easy at the beginning but after a while – it becomes just another part of the job.

He walks the streets near his house in the evening. The market is full, the streets are bustling, and the shops are busy. There are people everywhere – buying and selling, eating and walking, transiting or standing still - lost in their worlds. His peers must be right – it truly does not matter. In all this crowd and a world pre-occupied with itself – what one man does or does not do cannot matter. Whether he sees the adulterated petrol in one station on the highway or does not – the world moves on. Make peace, he says to himself immersing into the crowd and buying himself some fast food.

The night, however is different. He is alone. I am again pumping hard again – in his veins and through his heart. He cannot sleep. There is no one around and no voices to be drowned. It starts to matter again – what he does or does not do.

He takes the same route again in the morning on the highway. The man at the petrol station looks at him with curiosity as he walks in. Nothing has changed at his end. You need to stop this, he says firmly. The other man cannot understand him. Was the money not enough, he asks. No – he insists – the petrol has to be clean on my watch. As clean as it has come. As he stands there, the man opposite gets aggressive. There are abuses and there are threats. I can sense the pressure build up. The brave face, the hard look but beneath – the fear, the twitching fingers, the blood at the temples. It is not easy but he stands up to it. Unsure of what he has taken on but sure he cannot back out now.

The word gets around. He gets a call from the office and he goes back with a straight face. There are more threats – this time polite and nuanced but threats nevertheless. I will report what I see, he insists, nothing more and nothing less. You will be removed, he is told. He can see they do not like it. He is known now but not the way he would have liked. Suddenly it does not bother him. That night he writes a letter to the big boss in the head office and sends it off first thing in the morning. He puts everything he knows on paper.

Nothing happens for a week. He goes on his route as usual. There are more threats now. He listens patiently and moves on, without a word. I have done what is to be done, he says to himself.

Then the wheels start moving. There are calls from the head office. There may even be an investigating team, he learns. His boss is perturbed. The man at the petrol station is called to the city office. There are meetings, there are men in a huddle. He is called for a short while and then ignored. He hears from others that some convenient arrangements are being made. That matters are getting sorted informally. That eventually nothing will change. When it is over, the boss calls him and gives him a dressing. You have kept your job, he says, but not for long. Mend your ways, the directions are clear.

He is in a shock. Something inside him is crumbling and I can do nothing but watch. Many of his peers avoid him, some sympathize. They look down on him for his stupidity and yet look up to him for something else. Something they could not muster.

In the silence of his home, he cries. Slowly and to himself. The cold has become worse and he is miserable. However, an hour later, he is feeling better. The shock has passed away and there is still some resolve left. If the other side has not changed, why should he?

He is back on the road in some time. He returns to the petrol station and within a few minutes he knows for sure, nothing has changed. He takes the proof. This time, there is no threat. Wait here, he is told – we will make amends he is promised and they all leave. There is very little traffic around. A truck or two. It is near noon. He waits – hoping. In twenty minutes, there are two men on a motorcycle at the station. They look at him, pause for a second and then fire their revolvers indiscriminately. Without fear and with all the power of the bullet behind them. He has no time to protest or even raise his voice. It is over in under a minute.

There I flow – now much slower, now almost dry and still. The loud noise of the bullets was followed by silence for a long time. But I see movement. They are coming – hesitatingly but coming closer. His body is now stiff, his blood is dry but the word is spreading. The people are coming one by one – some in curiosity, some with anger. That one man sees me and then looks away in revulsion. He is concerned and disturbed. He knows the dead man and of his last few days. He speaks on his phone loudly and angrily and then looks at me and the body – again and again. I sense in him the same emotion I felt in the man I left. He will spread the news. He will not stop. He will let me live again.

Who says I am just a spot of blood that will disappear in a day? I could be the stain of guilt, the leftover of crime, the shame of anguish, the last hurrah of life or the color of sacrifice but today – I am none of those. Today – I am the silent voice of protest, the tiny murmur of dissent in a noisy and overpowering world and I am contagious. Like a disease let loose, like a flow that will override the uneven crevices, like the voice of that man spreading the news. 

