From: Parag Chitnis<paragjchitnis@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Arrange Marriage
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

The story began as he looked in the mirror. The efforts his mother and his younger sister had put from last one hour had shown good results. He was looking different- better. Along with his new shirt and pants, his completely shaved face, the aroma of the new perfume mixed with that of the talcum powder used to make him fairer, and his new hairstyle, for which his sister had taken more than half-an-hour, made him ready to go to the girl’s house. His grandmother put a black dot of kajal on his temple before getting out.

His coming back from US was of more for getting married than meeting his family. On the day he arrived, his mother had showed him photos of three different girls. While he looked at those, she told him how she’d registered his name at the marriage beuro and filtered out three girls from the pool of more than hundred girls. She told all the criteria she had used to filter these out. The bottom line was: only these three girls were fair, had a decent family background, were well educated, were from the same cast as of them and their kundalis matched with his. “But it’s all up to you, beta!” she said, “Whichever girl suits you. We are happy with any if you think you can live happily with her.”

His father chuckled and said, “Son, doesn’t matter how wisely you choose the girl, you’ll never be happy after marriage.” His sister and his grandmother burst into laughter but his mother didn’t like the comment. That day they were visiting the first girl, as ordered by his preference, among them.

They went in their car. His father drove while his mother sat in the front passenger seat. On the back seat, his sister was on his left and his grandmother on his right. They say old people are good at judging. Years of experience taught them it. All the way, everyone in the car advised him something. He was more nervous because of those advises than to meet with the girl he could be marring.

At the girl’s home, they made themselves comfortable in the hall. All the eyes surrounding him were judging him. But his side was no less in that. His parents talked with hers telling how good their son was. While his grandmother observed each and every relative of hers in the room, his sister gazed at the paintings on the walls and at the carpet on the ground.

“Though he lives in America, he hasn’t forgotten about our culture and tradition.” His mother said.

“Every year he visits us at least once. He’s very attached to the family.” His father followed.

His parents continued to praise him by referring ‘America’ or ‘US’ at least once in each of their sentence. He did nothing but to look at the girl’s father just like he used to look at his neighbours while asking them for the mangoes from their mango trees.

“Where do you live in US?” The girl’s father asked.

“Seattle. I was in Atlanta for the last two years, but my current job location is Seattle.” He answered.

 The way her father nod made him sure that he had no idea where those cities were. His mother also was unable to point those cities on the map, but she felt proud of her son. His job profile was not much of importance than his payroll.

The discussion slowly shifted to the girl. Her father told about her education, her current job, her interests and hobbies.

“We’re a very modern family. We don’t have any problem if she wants go for a job even after marriage.” His mother had never discussed this topic with him but his opinion was already assumed. His father supported his mother, “Nowadays every woman wants to be more than just a housewife. It’s different once they have a child…”

“I’ve heard every women in America works,” his mother interrupted, “We Indians are no less than them.”

His sister observed everything around and whispered her comments in his ear. He ignored them most of the times, but once in a while, he would hide his face with his hand and laugh. His grandmother talked with one of the girl’s uncles asking him if he had any relation with her cousin’s son’s in-laws as they had the same last name. The uncle could not relate them. So they went one generation up to find any link.

The girl appeared with the plates of snacks and the cups of tea in her hands. Her father introduced her to him and his family.

“She’s beautiful.” His mother said.

His sister commented something in his ear and giggled. He ignored her. The girl served them the snacks.

“She had made this.” Her mother said as he was taking the bite.

“It’s tasty.” He said in such a tone that no one could confirm whether this was true or only a formality.

She looked exactly as was in the photo his mother had shown him, as if she had come out of it. He wondered how she could do exactly the same makeup as she had done on the day of snapping that photo. She sat beside her father and smiled. His parents asked her a few questions which she answered like a candidate answering in a job interview.

When he was allowed to talk with her in private, they went to the terrace. The view around was of empty terraces of more apartments like this. At one terrace, a woman was drying washed clothes. She was too far to listen what these two talked. They talked about their likes and dislikes, their hobbies, their current jobs and career aspirations. Soon an awkward silence surrounded them. He looked across the terrace and she explained the plants at the far corner of the terrace. The explanation lasted no more than one line as he was clearly uninterested.

“Do you have boyfriend?” He asked, “Had” and then corrected.

“You wouldn’t have found me in the marriage beuro if I had one,” she said with a faint smile, “You had any girlfriend?” she stressed on ‘had’.

“One, but…”

“But?”

“Love and compatibility are two different things,” He said after a thought, “She’s from a different culture, different religion, different country. It’d have been difficult to adjust.”

“So you believe in arrange marriage where compatibility is preferred?”

“Don’t you?”

“The prince of my dream never landed in my life. Arrange marriage is a blessing for people like me,” She said with no grief in her voice, “Never been in love, never had ‘love and compatibility’ issue.”

He looked at her. In his mind, he removed the layers of makeup from her face. She still looked beautiful. He wondered why no one had fallen for her beauty.

He was taken aback when she asked him about his ex-girlfriend. No one had asked him about her before this. He didn’t know how much to talk on this topic to the woman who could be his future wife. He told her that they met two year ago at a mutual friend’s party. They were in relationship for more than a year. “We had no physical encounter.” He didn’t fail to mention this. Around six months ago, his family started to push him to come back to India and get married. That was when he left her. He hadn’t told his family about her.

She observed him while he was speaking. His eyes were fixed at the ground. Once she was sure that he was finished saying, she asked if he felt like he was playing with her emotions.

“What playing! No,” He responded suddenly, “At some point, I was serious about our relationship. The breakup was hard on me too. But it was better than having adjustment problems the entire life.”

They fell into silence once again. The woman on the other terrace had disappeared. Only the wet clothes on the string were visible.

“I’m telling you this because I think you should know this before you decide whether to marry me.” He broke the silence. He wanted to be honest with her. Secrets like this could have been a problem for their relation. His ex-girlfriend was his past and there was nothing he could do to undo it. Whichever girl he would marry, he wanted her to know this. He stressed on the ‘honesty’ word while speaking this.

“Can you forget her?” She asked, but without waiting for his answer, she continued, “You don’t have to answer it now, but if we’re going to get married, I need to know.”

He nodded without saying anything.



They sat at the same position in the car while returning as they were while coming.

“Did you like her?” His sister asked as soon as the car started.

“We’re not going to marry you in this cheap family.” his mother concluded before he could say anything.

“Her father is at very high post in the company. Three lakh is not a big deal for him. I don’t understand why he was making a big fuzz of it.” His father said.

“Our son isn’t just some guy. He’s studied in America and has a good job there. Three lakh would have helped their daughter to set her house.”

“One lakh and a bike was a good deal,” his father said and catching his eyes in the rare view mirror continued, “but seems like your fate is in someone else’s hand.”

His parents laughed, but he kept mum. He was hoping to have more conversations with the girl, but his parents had ruined all the possibilities of that. His sister had no comments on that. His grandmother was disappointed that even after talking with two of the girl’s uncles and one aunt, she couldn’t establish any relation to their family.

He couldn’t sleep that night. His small encounter with the girl on the terrace had left an impact on him. He had felt something there. The feeling was still with him, but he couldn’t understand what that was. How strange it was that the girl, whom he had met for no more than an hour, seemed to understand him more than his family, with whom he had lived his entire life! Her face was in front of his eyes. Her voice was in his ears, and her words were in his minds.

He got up from his bed. Making sure that everyone else in the house was asleep, he went to the terrace. Without caring about international call tariff, he called a number he hadn’t dialled in last six months. 

