From: Jayanthi Sankar<jeyanthisankar@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: My Mother is a Feminist
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

I.

Walking near the hawker center along Bangkit road, as if talking to Ravi, I thought, very soon I might end up committing suicide. A young Malay girl, with a shock, stared at my face as she passed. That’s when I realized that I had actually spoken the words aloud.

I reached the public phone. Sally picked at the second ring. She asked “Who is this please?” a little intrigued but in a sweet song like tone. When I answered, “Dewei,” she became silent for several seconds. I could hear her soft breathe on the other side, or so I imagined.

When I asked her, “Why did you block my number?” my stomach growled at the aroma that floated from the chicken rice stall at the back and I turned involuntarily to look. The elderly folks group seated there playing Chinese checkers laughed boisterously and I had to raise my voice to tell, “I sent you a friend request in face book and you rejected that as well.”

“I’ve told you so many times not to disturb me. Don’t you understand English?” Sally hissed. I was surprised at the sudden sternness in her voice. “All I want is your friendship. Please!”

“But I don’t want your friendship. Don’t you have friends of your age?”

“I left them all. I fought with them. My buddies avoid, ridicule me and all because of you.” I tried to explain but she wouldn’t listen. “Don’t be stupid *lah*. Did I tell you to leave them? Boy, grow up and complete your final year,” she coaxed me and cut the connection abruptly. Slamming the phone in its place I uttered, “Bitch!” and quickly looked around to see if anyone heard.

I was reminded of the invitation, “You are welcome to bring along your girlfriends. Dewei can invite his cocotte,” that Han had sent in the whatsapp group a couple of weeks before for which everyone was joking and ridiculing. If Ravi had not stopped me I would have certainly gone over Han’s house to kill him.

Perspiring, I walked frantically. I remembered having seen a public phone at the basement of Bukit Panjang Plaza. Only upon reaching there did I realize that I had no more twenty cent coins in my pocket. Only to get some coins I went hurriedly to buy a small coke at McDonald’s. Upon reaching there, I craved for a double cheese burger but decided to buy after calling Sally. For the first time, I realized my recent appetency.

“Sally, please add me back in whatsapp,” I pleaded the moment I heard her, “Nee Hau!”

“You again?”

“I can’t get over you nor can I concentrate in anything. Are you afraid your earnings might be affected?”

“Ya, so? I need to expand my circle of men. Your kind of emotional attachment can only pull me down,” she yelled. “Call my new agent if you want.”

“What kind of a profession is this, with zero morals?” I tried to provoke her.

“Were you all clean with morals that night? Don’t start spitting words you drank from your *mama*, okay?”

“I’ll kill myself and you will be the reason for that and I will write that down.”

“Dont call me again. Otherwise, I will report you to the police.”

“Okay *lah*, go ahead and report and let your family know of the life you are actually leading.”

“Shut up,” she shouted and cut the line.

I texted mother, “Are you back tonight?”

“Tomorrow night, why?” came with a wide smiley. Wondering, “Why can’t they return now that all the guests of the funeral gathering would have left,” I typed, “I’m very hungry.”



II

I rubbed my eyes as I came into the living room. “I’m not being myself ma,” The sight of her brought about aggressive war with the acids in my stomach. “May be your final year result next week is bothering you,” mother said as she continued to keep her eyes on the television screen.

Her unopened travel bag laid the corner of the living room. Cloudy and gloomy, it was ready to rain since morning. “I don’t care about the results. I hear voices telling me to commit suicide.” The acids in my stomach were creating havoc. I reached for the bread loaf. “Aren’t you cooking?”

“Voices? You are just too tired,” she stretched her hand to touch my forehead. I pulled myself backward. She touched me with her four fingers anyway. “You don’t have fever.”

Hurriedly I swallowed the slice I had munched. “I think I have schizophrenia.”

“Come on, you have been googling too much, I guess,” she tried to laugh. “I think I will walk to the wet market later. Want to join me? We could have breakfast on our way back.”

“I hear voices telling me I don’t deserve to live in this world and lately I talk loudly to myself and that’s been increasing in the past few days.” She reminded me of my recent text messages and expressed her concern all over again, When she started lecturing me on the importance of strengthening one’s mind, staring at her angrily, I showed my palm gesturing her to stop.

“It’s not even nine yet, why don’t you try sleeping off your stress now that you have all the time and luxury?”

“So, you think I am imagining?” I made a serious face. “Make me some soup noodles now and I am ready to come with you.”

“Try applying for some internship, to keep busy.”

“I need to tell you something.” I yelled as I switched off the Television. “And promise me that you will die with this secret of mine.”

“Dewei, I want to watch. It’s the final presidential,” seeing her smilingly go for the remote, I pounced to grab it in a flash, shouting disproportionately, “To hell with the US and your Hillary!”

“What’s it this time?” she turned solemn. “Are you very hungry?”

“When am I not very hungry?”

“Don’t shout at me as if I am the cause. Blame it all on your hormones.”

“I am frustrated at my hunger. I wish I could do something about this constant feeling of starving.”

“Fought with Han?”

“No. Every night, I dream of a woman, get disturbed and I haven’t been sleeping properly for several weeks. Few days back, after midnight I went up to the thirty first storey only to return in minutes,” I brought down my voice.

“Don’t be so stupid *lah!* I think you need a good break,” she got up to go to the kitchen. “Your ex?” She placed on the stove the Danish pot the half filled water. I followed her, “No, a woman is in her late thirties.” She took out the ingredients one by one. Taking out the frozen peas from the freezer, she started to chop the onions, carrot, beans, garlic, mush rooms on the cutting board.

“Oh just a dream!”

I watched her stir fry the onions and toss the cut vegetable in a separate pan and add them to the pot that boiled the noodles to finish off with a dash of salt and some pepper.

“It’s the same woman every time. And she is actually a whore.”

“What nonsense?” Mother’s expression terrified me but pretending to be calm I said, “Yes.”

“You mean...?” With the ladle held half way abruptly she stopped her stirring.

“It happened last month. And don’t get emotional now. I beg of you, please,” I sat adjacent to her.

Open mouthed, mother stared at me in shock. Her eyes, frozen, welled quickly like urban flash flood. She switched off the stove and hurried to seat herself back on the single sofa.

“Fifteen years older than you?” she managed a mundane question as if trying to conceal her hurt. “Fourteen. She is responsible for the state I am in,” I said as sat in the next single.

“What do you mean?” her voice had a little irritation and a lot of anger.

“After that incident I felt so much wanted, so much that I am unable to get over her,” I cried despondently. The big drops of tears shocked mother just as they did me. I never knew I could weep like that.

“But you just said she ruined you, Dewei. And, stop crying like a child,” mother said gritting her teeth.

“She has totally shattered me.” I wiped my tears.

“Did she come to our doorstep to drag you?” she piqued.

“How is she able to do this kind of a job hiding from her family, especially her nineteen years old daughter?”

“That’s none of our business.”

“Aren’t you against her ways?”

“Is she my sister or a cousin? Anyway, that’s her profession and we don’t know her journey.”

“But she screwed your son’s life.”

“Did she cross your path? Only you crossed hers.”

“The guys gave me too many that day.”

“If you can’t handle then why drink?”

“It was Ravi’s birthday. She was entertaining our group. I remember thinking how I ended up in that room when I woke up early in the early morning.”

“From that day you felt ‘wanted’?” Her eyes welled once again. “Not in our family, Dewei.”

“I keep thinking of her.”

“And that’s called ‘wanted’ in your vocabulary?”

“I think I love her very much.”

“Nonsense! Aren’t you old enough to know that she would do the same to hundreds of guys and they all know that’s her profession and she is not for real? You are almost twenty four, Dewei, please.” She was wiping away her cheeks.

“…”

“That’s instant gratification, or may be lust. You are naming your feelings and your needs wrongly.”

“I just can’t get over her. But why do you keep siding with her?”

 “I am not siding with her. It’s just that I am angry when you say she ruined your life.”

“A typical feminist! My life is gone and you don’t sympathize with me at all.”

“I don’t think your life is ruined.”

“Ravi says she must have done something to me like black magic.”

“Rubbish,” she said sternly. “Okay, let’s come back to you. I think you should see a doctor. Let him decide on the diagnosis. Let’s go tomorrow to get a referral.” When I hurried to say, “No, I will go on my own,” mother said, “Okay, please go.”

“Slut!” I murmured as I checked my whatsapp. “And you?” Full of annoyance Mother looked up. “Do you think she can sleep well?” I tried to digress as I reached for my wallet on the TV console.

“How does that bother you?” she glared at me.

“I was thinking with that kind of an earning…,” I said as I checked the contents.

“Did she dope your drink that day?”

“I don’t think so.”

“Then? I am searching for the values dad and I inculcated in you since young. Ironically, your Zufu gave you such a nice name.”

“Are you judging me?”

“I am not just your friend but also your mother and you almost always forget that conveniently.”

“Are you disappointed?”

“Didn’t you hide it from me only because I would be?”

“You are not a man, so you won’t know what I am going through,” I said trying to win over at least little of her sympathy.

“You will start feeling some peace only if you take it all on yourself. Stop finding external reasons to blame her and many justifications for your own actions.”

“Okay. I was yearning for this. Can I eat?” She went to the kitchen to pour the soup noodle in the bowl. I switched on the fan as I sat at the table. “When is Dad returning?”

“Next Wednesday? He told me to tell you to go to Johor this weekend.”

“But why so long?” Ravi had texted, “Will you join me for breakfast? Usual place in ten minutes?” I typed, “Yes.”

She glared at me. “It’s his only sister, who was almost his mother, who has passed away.”

I left in a hurry.

“You said you would come with me to the wet market.”

“Sorry, going for breakfast with Ravi.”

“And what was that?” She pointed at the big bowl on the table. I waved my hand and ran down.


III.

When I came out of the consultation room, Ravi looked instantly up at my face and I said, “It’s depression, he says.”

Looking around, “I told you,” he laughed without noise. His face displayed a slight self pride.

“You respond like ‘It’s a common flu not a dengue’.”

“These days depression really is like common cold. Did you tell the doctor everything?”

“Ya *lah*,” I said a little impatiently.

“You sound unhappy because it’s not some fancy name, but just a simple depression?”

 We walked towards the pharmacy. “I have to somehow try to get Sally’s daughter’s phone number. Her old agent is hopeless.”

“And what’s that for?”

“To tell on her.”

“Why so evil? This odious Dewei is totally new for me. What do you achieve by that?”

“Doesn’t she feel guilty? Doesn’t she have any shame? Does she even know what will happen if her daughter knows?”

“Come on, you think her family will believe you? Why so keen on her friendship anyway? Hey, I’ve been thinking of asking you something. Did you by any chance leave any of your things in her place?”

“No, why?”

“The guys also expressed that day. She has an air of black magic. These women do all that to keep their business thriving. Have you heard of Nam Man Prai Oil from Thailand?”

“No *lah*, definitely not across the sea into Singapore. They say it loses its effect if taken across the sea. And it’s damn expensive.”

“But there are ways. They tie the green, red, white, black and yellow strings to the bottle or put the bottle in a bag and tie the bag with those strings, then the effect remains they say but it’s not easy to get a genuine product, I heard.”

“Hey, shall we go for a bite?” I asked for which Ravi said, “I thought we had a heavy lunch before coming here.”

“Did we?” I laughed at his serious face when he said, “My stomach is so full that I can’t have dinner. And you ate double the amount, remember?”

“Whether you believe it or not, I am very hungry.”

“You have a voracious appetite. And,.”

“I am equally veracious about it,” I hoicked him by the shoulder. “Any quantity is not enough for me.”

“Were you born a glutton? Ha, ha. Jokes apart, did you tell the doctor about your abnormal hunger?” I nodded yes. “And hey Ravi, I remember smelling something very ugly and unpleasant before I left that place at dawn.”

“You did? Then it’s certainly corpse oil.” Aghast Ravi halted suddenly.

