From: Bibith Joy<bibithjoy1998@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: I’ll shape my own world, Thank you very much.
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

“So, Jake, what are your plans for college?” Mr. Cherian asked me as we sat down with my mother for the last parent teacher conference.

“Computer Engineering” my mother shouted with joy.

“Well, he does have the marks for a good college, but let him answer Mrs. Joseph.” Mr. Cherian said with disappointment.

“Computer engineering, I guess. Yeah.”

“It’s your life Jake, don’t guess.” Mr. Cherian said with a stern face.

“Excuse me, but are you trying to change his mind?” my mother asked, confused.

“Not at all Mrs. Joseph, it’s just that...” Mr. Cherian started to explain. “It’s just that your son seems to be disinterested in taking up engineering. Here, take a look at your son’s paper for English. It’s clear that your son is struggling between what you are expecting of him and what he wants.”

“What? That can’t be right.” She took the paper and read it, surprised, she turned and asked me. “I thought you wanted computer engineering. What happened?”

“Jake, I can see from your papers that you have good marks but I want to know what you want. You have good marks in all of your papers and you don’t lack in extracurricular either. But when I asked all your teachers, they described you as uninspired. To tell you the truth Mrs. Joseph, I have only seen your son smiling when he is talking with his friends. Friends that hates each other.” Mr. Cherian continued.

“What are you saying?” my mother asked, now confused than ever.

“Yes, the only time he smiles is with his friends who hates one another. The only time we don’t see them fighting each other is when they walk with him.” Mr. Cherian sighed.

“Why do they fight? And why is he the only one who stops them?” my mother asked.

“Well you see, they’re from good families; but even more, they are passionate in their works. One is the track team captain, the top scorer in the campus, a boy band singer, a rich kid and a druggie. They're all from different social circles of the campus and the only time I have ever seen them have fun or relax is when they are with your son.” Mr. Cherian said, now confused himself.

“What are you implying?” my mother asked.

“It seems your son is acting as a neutral ground and bringing them together. I was hoping to ask you if he does this in your family as well?” Mr. Cherian asked, hoping for a clue into my passion.

“Sentient.”

“what?” Mr. Cherian asked.

“You asked us on my first class here how we would change the world right?”

“Yeah, I did.”

“This is my answer. We are losing what makes us special, humanity. The ability to understand others and their actions. I’m going to show the world, the strength of humanity from within this cursed society. One person at a time. And my friends are just the beginning, I’ll change the world so that everyone will understand everyone else. Only then, can we even come close to peace.”

Few moths later in college:

“Why do you even try? You told me yourself that he ignores you right? Then why? Just let it go and move on.” – Rebecca.

“I don’t know why! I just feel like he needs my help. There’s something that just keeps on bugging me about him”

“It makes no sense Jake, I mean, why do you even feel like that? You don’t even know him. I mean come on? Whenever you’re not with us, you’re having a conversation with your crush in front of the canteen. There has to be a reason as to why you’re giving him special attention.”- Sneha.

“Bro, chillax, you’re making things up. I really would have thought that you were gay, well, if it wasn’t, you know? You! “- Chris.

“But?”

“There’s no but! Like you said, it just the homesickness from moving to Bangalore finally hitting you. Just go to your hostel and watch some sitcom and get some sleep.” – Sneha.

“Yeah bro, the sleepless nights studying Psychology must have left you tired. Just get some z’s and everything will be okay tomorrow.” – Chris.

“Here, take my iPod. There’s a folder named sleep songs. It will help you if you end up having trouble sleeping. Just promise me that you will go home now, drink a glass of warm milk and listen to the folder and you’ll sleep just like that”. - Rebecca.

“Okay, thanks, guys. Guess I’ll go and do that. Wait? what about tomorrow’s exam?”

“Sleep.”- Rebecca.

“Yeah, we’ll help you after you wake up.”- Chris.

“Now go. I don’t want to see you, get lost.”- Rebecca.

“Come on, I’ll drop you.”- Sneha.

“It’s okay, I’ll walk. It will give me time to think anyway.”

“Ok, do that then. But go straight to your hostel okay?”- Sneha.

“Ok, I will. Bye.”

“Bye.”- All three.

As I walked away from them, I re-winded all that they had said. It was true that he never had a constant conversation with me. Hell, he rarely talked to me. But I don’t know why? I feel as though he has a lot to say to me. Whenever he skipped a lot of class, or have taken the entire days off, the next day he would come. Hug me, tickle me, pull my tee shirt and annoy me during class. And always with a big happy smile, as if he had gone through the toughest time of all and it was his first day back in the sun. I just want him to confide in me, I want him to know that I will be there in his brightest days and the darkest of nights. I want to understand him. He has to be the first one in this college, but why is he so tough? Why can’t I seem to understand him? Whatever I do only seems to push him away even more.

“So, give it to me. All the dirt behind that smile of yours.”

I was finally able to sit with him and finally do some serious digging into his past. After weeks of asking and his genuine ignore and ditching. I told him that he hit me as a character I am using in my latest writings and I wanted to know more about him to enrich the character.

“So, what do you want to know from me?” he asked me as we found ourselves a good seat on the stairs in front of the hostel.

“Everything,” I told him. “But, you can start with your family. Well, if you want specifics.” I said with a slight smile and tilted head.

“Well, huh, well? Okay. My mother is a working woman. My father is in a wheelchair as long as I could remember. It was a love marriage and one that didn’t work out in the long run. Now, my mother and father sleep apart. I like my sister because she always talked to me in her room when they were fighting. She would crank up the volume of the music playing, just so I won’t hear them, ignoring the neighbours. Then, after she finished her studies and got herself a job, she got an apartment and I would go and stay all the time. To get away from the fighting and sometimes, just to unwind. It never felt like home, though, but when I was there, I felt relief.” His eyes were saddened but not enough to fill them with tears.

I was amazed at how easily he could tell me the story. How long must have taken him to accept it and move on? To make it just another scar from his past?

“But even then, I still loved them both. My father may have been a thug, but when it came to me, he was never bad. He was always there and encourage me whenever he could and share a pack of smoke when he felt nostalgic. He would tell me his memories from high school. From all the mischief to the subject of romance. I could tell him anything and I felt like he can do the same.”

At that moment, I knew, I was selfish all this time. I believed my life was so bad that nobody had it worse than me. But it was also the time I had ever been close to solving as to why I felt a pull towards him. I saw similarities between us. Not in our stories but in us, our ways and our characters.

As we continued, I felt it as I hit a few soft spots. The momentary change of looks, change of focus, the inertia of his mouth. Each time it happened, he would ask me something. A part of my story, it was not easy at first but gradually became easy as I accepted it more and more. I realized then that I still had invisible chains that held me back from completely understanding myself. With each person, I connected myself to, the chains became more visible.

I walked over to the gate, the one in front of the science block. Green while attached to pillars made of red bricks. Painted over and over, that It has been too long since it has lost its ability to speak to the admirers. While on all the other days, it looked welcoming, today, it was as if it was asking me to stop and think. To reconsider. What? I do not now. But as of now, I didn’t want to go just yet. So, I turned myself around and walked towards the men’s hostel on the campus. And as I turned the corner of the auditorium building, he was there. Sitting there looking at the water heaters on top of the hostel building. On the steps parallel to the one where he talked to me for hours.

“Hey,” I said.

“Hey,” he replied with eyes that have seemed to be lost in thoughts.

So I slowly sat down and got comfortable.

“Want to talk about it?” I asked.

He simply replied no. I sat there with him, just to be there. My thoughts completely shut down. Mind blank and the talkative mouth under a thousand locks. On his own time, he slightly tilted his head. Once made sure that I won’t move and what seemed to be a long debate in his head, he lowered his head onto my shoulders and just sat there. Motionless, speechless and for the first time, he was himself, truly and simply himself.

The reason why I couldn’t understand him was because he was a mirror image of myself. Our story may have been different, but I felt as if our souls were similar. And I wasn’t simply ready to accept myself and let go of my past. And so in a way, he helped me in letting go and thus, allowed me to unshackle one of the chains that kept me from understanding others.

The world may think that scientists can change it with one gadget or maybe even God will forgive them and change all the carbon dioxide to oxygen for free. But that’s just the easy way out, to rely on others to do your work for you. If we want to change and save this planet from ourselves, we have to sacrifice ourselves to do so. 

