From: Abhishek Jha<abyjha@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: The Heartbeat of Heaviness
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

“Listen, you should ask Chota Babu for some money when he comes today”

Muniya laid the cloth containing the food on the cemented platform under the banyan tree. Her slender figure crawled under the tree which tried its best to filter the harsh sunlight. Her husband Mukesh went to the hand pump beside the tree and filled some water in an earthen tumbler.

“Are you getting what I am saying? We might starve to death if things go like this.”

Mukesh brought the water and sat beside the cloth on which Muniya had spread the sattu dividing it into two portions, the bigger one for him and the smaller portion for her. Besides sattu, there were few peeled onions, green chilies and some salt.

“Why do you behave as if you are deaf?” Muniya was a petite woman but she was often told that her voice was heavy for a woman of her size. She kept her eyes on Mukesh as he poured water on the sattu and started eating it. She took the border of her sari and started fanning herself with it. It was a hot day for this time of the year. As she was waving herself, she noticed the holes in the sari and turned her attention back to Mukesh.

“Have you pledged that you won’t answer me, right? Poor Muniya let her blabber all she wants.”

Mukesh kept eating and didn’t even raise his head to look at her. She kept her hand on her forehead and moved it dramatically from one side to the other but there was still no reaction from Mukesh. She gave up and took some salt, crushed one small onion along with a green chili and mashed them into her portion of wet sattu. By the time she started eating; Mukesh had finished his portion and was washing his hands at the pump. He returned to the platform and sat with his back towards her, looking towards the highway beyond the fields.

“What have I done now? Why do you always behave like this?”

“Nothing. I just don’t want to get into an argument with you. You know how things are and still you keep pestering me about taking money from chota babu. You know how these people are. You want me to be beaten in public or what?”

Muniya fell silent. She was no longer looking at him. She buried her head into her breasts and started mumbling something Mukesh couldn’t understand.

“Ae Muniya, don’t be upset. We will manage something.” He came and sat beside her. “I have been thinking for a while now.”

“Oh! So now you think also.” Muniya raised her head and stuck her tongue out as she said that.

“Don’t behave like a child. You are the mother of three children.”

“That’s why I am worried. I am really worried for them. We can’t even feed them properly. We can’t give anything they want. Yesterday, Chunnu wanted biscuit, so I told him to go to Mishra’s shop and get it. But Mishra refused and instead started abusing him. When he came back you know what he asked me? He asked me why Mishra called him a bastard.”

“These people will never change. They will always hate us. No matter how much civility we show. They will always bring forward backward into everything.”

“You always do this. I talk about the bare essentials and you start talking about big things which fly over my head.”

Mukesh looked at her and then brushed his hand on the dark colored skin. Her features were carved out beautifully, embodying a sensual vibe which made her irresistible. When she was young, all of his friends wanted her.

“Muniya, let’s go away. Let’s get away from the village. We can go to the city. If not Dilli or Bambai, even Patna will do.”

“And what we will do in Patna? At least we have work here.”

“This work? This work isn’t even enough to fill our bellies. Every time someone is ill in our family we have to go and literally beg for money from these landlords. We don’t have enough to even survive. We will find work in the city. Lots of construction work going on and one of my friends from the city was telling me both of us can get work in that.”

“You want the mother of your children to carry brick and cement now. What kind of a husband are you?”

“You are so dramatic about everything. It’s just work, like the one we do here.”

“Babu, what do I keep telling you? Dream only at night! It’s afternoon right now. Common, let’s get to work. Otherwise Chota Babu won’t give us a penny.”

Mukesh sat up, tied the gamcha on his head and started cutting the wheat harvest that covered the land. Muniya also lifted the sari to her knees and with her sickle and jute basket started working again. They kept on toiling in silence, both lost in the sea of thoughts that generally led them nowhere. Mukesh imagined the life he could possibly lead in the city, the opportunities that awaited him while Muniya dreamt about a new sari and a bag full of biscuits for her children. As the sun started to go down, their tiring day came to an end. Chota Babu’s tractor had arrived to pick up the harvest but instead of coming himself, he had sent one of his servants. Mukesh and Muniya loaded the harvest and when the tractor left, they washed their feet and hands at the pump and started walking towards the village.

“So many things I said. All of it came down to nothing. He didn’t even turn up”

“Chota Babu is a big man. Dukhiya was telling me he is planning to stand in the MLA elections. He has been promised a ticket by the ruling party.”

“But his heart isn’t very big. He should have at least given us some advance for the season. “

“I will ask him again tomorrow.”

“Really? You are a coward. I will ask him myself.”

Inside the village, the commotion was at its peak. Children were out on the narrow lanes, playing gilli danda or just running around. The children on the street reminded them about their own children.

Mukesh and Muniya’s eldest daughter was in charge of taking care of her two younger brothers when they were working on the fields.

“Let’s stop over and buy the biscuit at Mishra’s shop” said Mukesh.

“Can’t we go to some other shop?”

“We have to walk a mile for that and it’s not even on our way. Why change, we take everything from Mishra’s shop only.”

“Yes but I don’t like the drunkard.”

“I know him from my childhood. He is harmless.”

Mishra’s shop was located just two lanes away from their hut. Mishra was the son of a well to do landlord and despite not being good at anything, had established a shop from the dowry he had received during his wedding. He sold groceries from the front door of his shop and hooch from the back door. More than selling hooch though, he was interested in consuming it and there was no time of the day when he wasn’t drunk.

They walked towards the shop and Mukesh asked him for a packet of biscuit.

“Is this your father’s shop?” The smell of hooch dominated the air as he spoke.

“What?”

“Is this your father’s shop? You haven’t even paid for last month’s ration. Do you think everything here comes for free?” He shouted more than he spoke. With nothing but the sacred thread to cover his upper body, his paunch became a messenger of his emotions.

“Mishra bhaiya, we will pay you as soon as the harvest is complete. You know me from childhood. Have I ever cheated on you?”

“The problem with your kind of people is that if you give them a finger, they want your whole hand. You should be tied to a pole and beaten. I am not giving you anything on credit. Bring some cash and get as much biscuit as you want.”

“Please bhaiya, try to understand. We will pay you as soon as we get the money after the harvest.”

“No more excuses. I am not giving you a damn thing until you clear all your dues.”

“Try to understand our problem” Muniya broke in. Mishra now moved his eyes away from Mukesh and started gazing at her intently. He stared at her from top to bottom.

“Hmmm…Now that your wife says so. I will try and understand. But you see, I can’t give you anything for free.” He lowered his voice as he went on “I know you can’t give me cash but you know, things can be worked out.” He kept his eyes on Muniya as he spoke to Mukesh

“What are you saying?”

“I am just saying that you send this dark beauty to my place, for a night only and take anything you want from this shop. Do you get that or do I have to explain it to you in detail?”

Before Mahesh could say anything, Muniya spat on Mishra’s face. “Motherfucker!”

Mishra, realizing what had happened started screaming. “Thieves! Fuckers! Rat eaters! You low caste dirt bags. How dare you do this to me?”

People from nearby houses ran towards the shop after hearing Mishra scream. Some men who were drinking hooch at the back of the shop asked him what had happened.

“These fuckers! They keep taking things from my shop without paying me for months. When I asked them for money, this little rat, this Mukesh, offers me his wife for a night in exchange for groceries. What kind of a man is he? And what kind of a woman is his wife? Look at her, standing here as if it’s part of their daily routine. I told them I am not like them, I can’t be like the pigs that live in the gutter and fuck whoever they can get their hands on but then she started forcing herself on me.”

Mukesh and Muniya were stunned. They understood what was coming out of Mishra’s mouth but it was hard for them to believe that this was happening to them. A good crowd had gathered by now who were nodding and mumbling between themselves. They were also staring at Muniya, penetrating every layer of self respect that she wore. Mishra kept rambling; the entire crowd was listening to every word he spoke, nodding their heads at intervals. Mukesh looked around. It was a crowd full of Mishra’s neighbors and other upper caste folks. He took Muniya’s hand and walked out of there, heading straight towards his house. Muniya’s hand was shaking with rage. They walked for a minute without looking at each other.

“I am sorry”, said Mukesh, breaking the silence that had walked in between them.

“You should be sorry. But I would have preferred if you were angry.”

Mukesh stopped walking, her hand still in his.

“You know that it would have been foolish to react, they would have lynched us.”

“At this moment, I want to spit on your wisdom.”

“Then go ahead, spit.”

“You know I can’t do that. Let’s go home”

They started walking and as they came close to their hut, they could hear the voice of their children playing. Muniya had buried his head and was staring blankly at the ground. Mukesh found it difficult to look at her face but kept his hand on her shoulder. “You were right. We will change the shop. I will go to the one outside the village. It will work out.”

“No, let’s leave the village for good. We might starve to death in the city but that death would be much better than dying a hundred deaths each day in this living hell.” 

