From: Rituparna Sandilya<rituparna_sandilya@yahoo.co.in>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Zuleikha
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

The empty cradle haunts Zuleikha. It was not always so. She had been all-absorbed in her perfumes for so long that it took her a while to realize that there was a lack in her life.

For almost as long as she had been married and lived in Agra, she spent her days making perfumes and selling it to the ladies of the royal harem. She dealt in hope, and it gave her immeasurable joy to think that she could make a difference to other lives with her labour of love - a touch of a rare herb could turn the fortunes of a forgotten wife, make her the Emperor’s favourite once again; certain fragrances had the power to rejuvenate and invigorate the senses; others to induce languor; some to soothe frayed nerves; a few to help sleep. Whatever the intended effect, Zuleikha had it in her power to cater to the special needs of her clients. Spurred on by her success, she found herself caught up in the excitement of new discoveries of exotic flowers and creating more fragrant perfumes. Thus, lost in her own world, she had never cared about what the world said of her. But of late, she had heard the snide remarks getting louder and more frequent - as if people wanted to make sure that she heard what they had to say.

Wherever she went, she was the odd one out and people wondered aloud what she did the whole day - with no children to tend to, no guests thronging her haveli, no retinue of servants scurrying about carrying out her orders. No wonder she did such good work, she was frequently told. With the thousand responsibilities and aches of a mother, could she have indulged herself so? For, what was this whole perfume thing but indulgence? In the past, she had been able to ignore such remarks with a shrug. But now, at times, she felt a faint impulse to defend herself - felt like saying, what was indulgence to them was compulsion for her. But then she let go – it did not matter one way or the other what they said. She however came to realize that whatever she did, wherever she went, she would forever be defined by this lack in her life, never in terms of what she had - her attributes, qualities, talents - and more so, ironically, from members of her own sex. From men, with whom she had little interaction, she got only vibes of attraction (from the young ones) and sympathy (from the elderly). And the person who sympathized with her the most was her father.

Her ageing, ailing father - wasting away in Multan, forever longing for the comfort and company of his daughter, and being admonished for it by his wife as improper sentiments for the father of a married daughter. “That’s her home”, she would tell him categorically. “A woman’s life is with her husband, even if a perpetually absent one.” Besides, Zuleikha had herself chosen to marry a foreigner - a Persian - and she would have to face the consequences. “No home can be yours unless you make it your own” – she had told her daughter, the only time Zuleikha came to Multan with swollen eyes, after the Khwaja, her husband, had left Agra for Fatehpur Sikri.

Zuleikha never forgot her mother’s words, and never forgave her for saying it. But she knew that her father would not be as obedient as she. For, he simply refused to accept that his daughter was now a woman, and belonged to another man. A stranger! He could never understand what Zuleikha had found in the Khwaja – gave her away (oh the pang of that loss never to be filled again!) putting a stone on his heart, completely against his wishes. And this man – so renowned, so honoured – what had he given his daughter but loneliness and an empty haveli to echo it in?

True. Being the Khwaja – chief artist of the ‘kitabkhana’, the imperial workshop at the Mughal Emperor Akbar’s court – meant that Zuleikha’s husband was wholly wedded to the Emperor’s wishes. Drowned under the weight of hundreds of imperial commissions, all of which he was bound to accept, the master miniaturist frequently sought refuge at Satan’s Palace, the infamous brothel of Shaitanpura, and stumbled back home in the arms of his paint seller friend, Salim Amiri – only to find Zuleikha’s door firmly locked.

She was much younger than he, but fiercely independent-minded. She brazenly told him he was no artist, simply the chief of Akbar’s second harem - the ‘kitabkhana’; and warned her step-son of his impending doom in the presence of his father. The precocious Bihzad, who was already being trained to follow in his illustrious father’s footsteps, understood little of the warnings, engrossed as he always was - whenever he visited Zuleikha’s chamber - inhaling the fragrance of her flowers and intently listening to the stories she read out which he would later translate into images.

These evenings with the Khwaja and Bihzad between them were rare for Zuleikha, but even they vanished when Akbar decided to shift his capital from Agra to Fatehpur Sikri. For the ‘kitabkhana’ and its artists soon followed the Emperor’s court and harem to the new capital. Only Zuleikha did not – the pomp of the court meant less to her than her perfumes. So all she had after the Khwaja left was the empty haveli - to make her perfumes and house her loneliness in.

It was now the height of summer. But even the blast of the April sun could not confine Zuleikha to her haveli. The royal harem was now just a shadow of itself – still Zuleikha went on her rounds as usual, leaving mid-morning and returning late in the afternoon. But one day, she came home by noon – her steps heavy, her eyes a blur, her body numb. She headed straight for her quarters, slammed the door of her room shut and cried inconsolably. Nikisa, surprised that she should be back this early, knocked on her door. She could make out Zuleikha was crying but could not fathom why, and left after an hour’s wait, wondering why her mistress was behaving so strangely these days.

The reason was actually very simple. On her way from one client to another, Zuleikha had heard something – it was not spoken out loud but was distinctly audible. “Infertile”, a group had sniggered, as she passed them by on the street. It stabbed her more deeply than the wound of a dagger. Why did it hurt so much when a blind man was called ‘blind’ or a lame man ‘lame’?

Back home, her thoughts returned to the Khwaja, away at Sikri. She remembered with a fresh pang that her marriage to him had isolated her as nothing else could. And all those accumulated marital years… what had they amounted to? A lonely heart, an empty bed - and now, an unyielding womb. She had been lonely for years – and yet, why could she not resign herself to it? Accept it as her condition? Why did she still miss the Khwaja so much? For months, she had not been loved. She longed for the Khwaja’s touch, even more for his company. He could be so tender and affectionate, loving and gentle - if he wished to. She could count on her fingers the evenings they had spent in each other’s company in all their years’ together – rare moments of pleasure that her memory now clung to passionately.

Of late, when the emptiness of the haveli clawed in upon her, she felt a dull ache she had not known before - wished she had an infant in her arms, someone to call her own. At night, she had an overwhelming desire to hold a child close to her breast, nurse him, lull him to sleep, envelop him in the warmth of her bosom.

They all knew she loved solitude. But as a maiden, she had always been fond of company – and the thing that most readily brought a smile to her lips was the cackling laughter of an infant. One of the ladies of the harem that she visited, Ruksana, had a daughter of three months. Mehr, they called her. She was round and healthy, soft and dimpled – just the kind Zuleikha longed to have. She developed a special bond with the child and often felt tempted to take her away. The baby, too, reserved the most precious smile for Zuleikha, the mother would say. As for herself, Ruksana was too depressed with the Emperor’s neglect to enjoy the beauty of her baby. If she had a child, Zuleikha often thought, it would not matter whether her husband neglected her or not. She was used to it anyway. Just the child would be enough for her – reason enough to live and be happy.

It seemed ages since the Khwaja had left Agra for Sikri. Zuleikha felt empty, futile this April afternoon. She thought of Multan once, of her father, but then she remembered her mother’s words. After whole nights of bitter tears following her last visit to Multan, she had finally learnt to accept that she was no more than a visitor in the home she had grown up. A welcome visitor, no doubt, but welcome as long as the visits were infrequent. So, where did that leave her? She had nowhere else to go, no escape routes, no friend or lover. So now, as always, she was left with only her work. She felt the need to work even harder now, more than ever before. For, how else could she validate her existence? Her endless months and years on earth?

For the first time in her life, she was haunted by the thought of her own mortality. For the very first time, it struck her with the force of a revelation that her creations, though useful were only evanescent; and that, while the Khwaja’s paintings would survive the ravages of time, her perfumes would not. The Khwaja, in fact, would live on not only in his paintings, but also in his son Bihzad - in the arch of Bihzad’s brows, in the sensuous curve of his lips, in those long slender fingers that were meant only to paint. But above all, he would live on in Bihzad’s mind, live forever in his memory.

And what would she leave behind her - empty bottles, with just a whiff of civet, musk, or marigold? Her throbbing, intense, lonely life reduced to just a whiff! What about her eyes and lips, her joys and sorrows, her childhood memories, her love of everything beautiful? Whom would she bequeath them to? In whom would she go on after her death?

That one word, “infertile”, thrown at her by a bunch of insensitive people, had opened up the floodgates of Zuleikha’s long-suppressed sorrow, the continuing pain of her childless existence.

      She had shut herself up for hours that afternoon, trying to fathom the meaning of her life. Her eyes still wet, hair dishevelled, her jaguli gown crumpled, she does not look herself. She even feels like a stranger. With an enormous effort of will, she raises her body, reminding herself that she was never meant to lie prostrate. As she opens her door, the oblong rays of the setting sun fill up the room with a rosy hue, enveloping her too in its soft glow.

      It is an unnaturally quiet twilight hour. Not a leaf stirs in the courtyard, and there is not even a faint rustle of wind in the trees. Zuleikha returns to her room, rests her back against the bed-post, and stares out the window. Ensconced thus, she sits alone in the gathering darkness, the empty cradle by her side... and strangely... thinks of Bihzad. 

