From: Carolyn Singh<jumpyjimpy7@gmail.com>
Date: 09 December 2016 19:00
Subject: The Backlash of Coffee and Cream
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Muthu parked his black Hero Honda outside the gate, heaved himself off the motor-bike, and headed for the front-door of his home. His helmet was so heavy that his neck, thick though it was, looked like it would snap under its weight. The collar of his white shirt was soaked in sweat, and while the armpits weren’t yet damp, he could feel his vest underneath paste itself onto his flabby body.

He didn’t know how he’d become so fat, and as he approached the door he clutched his jiggling belly and sighed: too much eating, and not enough exercise. He could feel droplets of sweat trickle from his hair, making rivers on his dusty face. He stuck his hand up into the muggy air within his helmet and attempted to clean himself off as he walked onto the veranda. The front-door was slightly ajar, so he kicked off his shoes and tiptoed inside.

The living-room was sparsely furnished: just three wicker chairs with a sofa to match. His wife had put up thin pieces of white tulle which hugged the windows like cobwebs.

Through the dense shield of his helmet he saw Angelica, his wife, propped up against the cushion-less sofa reading a book. He paused for a moment, temporarily forgetting the pressure of the helmet on his head; she was so beautiful. It was like she was on television. In another world. *From* another world.

His heavy breathing began to fog up the lens; His own acrid breath was suffocating him within the globe of the helmet; and still Angelica did not notice him. He unclipped the black orb and yanked it off. As though being plunged in water, the clean air swallowed him unexpectedly.

It was then that she looked up. “Hey.” She said indistinctly; as though she were talking through glass. What sort of greeting was that? ‘Hey?’ Who did she think he was? A manservant? But his shyness at seeing her face overcame his sudden flare of anger.

“Hey.” He mumbled back.

“Glad you got back safe.” She said softly. He had been so annoyed that she had not noticed him. Yet now, those few words seemed to have cracked the glass. He moved towards her slowly, his fingers shaking. He set his helmet on the coffee-table, whipped the black tendrils off his forehead and looked again at his beautiful wife. But she had put the book back up. Like an impenetrable glass panel.

Suddenly fuming, Muthu thoughtlessly emptied his pockets: handkerchiefs, matches, coins, bills....all the prices he had paid.

“Hey, did you buy milk and eggs?” Angelica asked, peeping up from her book and looking up at his dark, glistening face. He found his mouth open involuntarily; the beauty-spot on her chin was so dark against her peaches-and-cream complexion; like a cardamom in a bowl of rosy milk.

“I...I forgot.” He faltered, “I...I’m so sorry.” She did not seem frustrated, but he stumbled on anyway, “I...I’ll go now and get it!” And he grabbed his bike-keys from the table.

“No need.” She replied calmly, “It’s alright—”

“No no!” He insisted, “I will go.” And he scurried out.

When he got back, she was still sitting on the sofa, her perfectly sculpted nose still in her book. Once again, Muthu slipped off his shoes, and then padded towards her in his nylon socks, leaving perspired foot-marks on the bare floor. He tentatively sat down beside her, a cub sheepishly approaching a deer, unaware that cubs grow into tigers.

He heaved a loud sigh.

It was a signal.

Anyone else would have understood. Yet it seemed as though there was a tank between them: she was inside, a beautiful sparkling fish, twirling carelessly in the water, and he stood starkly and watched from the outside.

A child on a stranger’s lap, he shifted uncomfortably. The silence made his toes curl. He sighed again, more deliberate this time, and delicately cleared his throat, whisking a little phlegm in his gullet.

Still, there was no response. Like there were oceans between them...

It was three years ago that Muthu had been asked to go to the USA on a business-trip. He was to accompany his boss and present a paper at the Company’s headquarters. He had enjoyed his trip to the USA very much. There was so much food for so cheap, and there were so many women, wearing almost nothing—it had been a paradise.

But it was when he had walked into the Philadelphia Company Headquarters that he had fallen head over heels. There she was, sitting at the front-desk in a black pencil-skirt and a purple collared shirt. Her curly blonde hair and pale skin were so delicious, and her blue eyes were hypnotic. He’d never seen such beauty in his life before. He had instantly fallen in love with her. And her generous scoop of open chest.

She too had fallen in love. It was everyone’s dream comes true: the Indian man got his fair and lovely girl, and the American had gotten her dark, handsome prince.

Her parents had been sceptical; after all, he could barely speak English, and when he did it sounded strange and inferior to their own accent. Plus he was a mess: he washed food down with cups and cups of sugary tea, not to mention he ate pasta with his bare hand. He sniffed and sneezed without covering his mouth, and he was always staring: not just at the daughter with whom he had a relationship, but at her two sisters too.

But they were married almost immediately; they were at the peak of euphoria.

Muthu had taken her back to India with him to meet his family. She had loved it: the jewellery, colourful saris, the exotic cuisine; and his family had loved her: angelic like her own name, graceful, funny, extremely friendly, and, undoubtedly white.

How many women had his mother boasted to that her son had married a white woman. In fact, he too had boasted about it to his friends:

“Look, I made the foreigner fall in love with me!” It did not matter that she was just a secretary, and that she did not even have a degree. She was white. That was enough.

They had gone back to the USA. At first it had been wonderful. Unlike many of his Indian friends and their wives, whose exact amount of indulgence was known through the number of their children, Muthu and Angelica made love almost every day, sometimes several times a day. And she was so slim, just like the women in the movies. She was like those bikini-women; she had a body like a slut; she was irresistible.

Even after a year, when most men’s wives bloated like balloons, Angelica remained as sexy as ever: her belly did not swell, her breasts did not sag, and her sexual appetite did not wane.

But Muthu couldn’t help feeling that...something was wrong.

It had all started in December, several months earlier: Muthu’s request for a visa renewal had come back denied, so the couple had moved back to Mumbai, Muthu’s home city. Muthu managed to get his old job back, and Angelica stayed at home.

The first weekend back in India they went to Muthu’s parents’ home on the other side of the city. While his mother bustled around, frying meat dishes, rolling out chapattis, and boiling gravies in the kitchen, Angelica had sat in the living room, kicked her feet up onto the coffee-table and watched TV! After a few of his father’s angry stares, Muthu patted Angelica gently on the shoulder and said:

“Hey Angie, don’t you think mum needs some help in the kitchen?” Without taking her eyes off the TV set, she called,

“Hey mum!” Muthu could feel his insides cringe. Hey? 

um*? “Do you need any help?” Muthu’s mum came out of the kitchen, patting chapatti dust off her sari.

“No no.” She said genially, “No need! You sit!” Of course any Indian would translate that as ‘Yes, come and help you lazy woman’, but Angelica was not an Indian. She had simply shrugged.

At dinner, while his own mother served everyone chapattis, and spooned on gravy as it began to dry on their plates, Angelica gulped food down like a man, and when Muthu asked her for some chicken gravy hoping that she would ladle it on, she slid the whole bowl to him and said:

“help yourself, love.”

It was only after that incident that he started noticing other things: whenever he came home after work, she would be reading a book even though the floors were dusty, there were dishes in the sink, and the bed hadn’t even been made.

“Angelica,” he’d said one day, trying to hold back his frustration after having found her watching a movie on her laptop, still in bed, still in her pajamas, “There are lots of dishes in the sink.”

“Yeah,” she replied with a yawn, tying her loose blonde hair into a messy bun, “I wasn’t in the mood today. Could you manage it, hon?”

Manage it?

He’d never washed a dish in his life before. That was not his job.

He’d gone back into the kitchen and stared at the dishes piled up in the box-like sink. There were the chicken bones from the night before on a dry plate. That would have been his. He’d never dumped the bones on his plate before; he always just tossed it in the sink—it wasn’t his job to clean it! He marched back to the bedroom. He would exert his authority over his wife. He would not tolerate it any more.

But when he looked at her from the door, he felt his heart soften. Turn to absolute mush. His lips felt dry. What would he say to her? He would stutter and stumble; she would throw her head back and laugh. What did it matter anyway? Just a few dishes, right? So, feverishly he turned back, and washed all the dishes.

And now, here he was again, stuck in the same rut.

“Oh,” Angelica said lifting her eyes to look at him. Her blue eyes were electric; he couldn’t seem to say anything when he looked at her, “your mum called. They want to come here for dinner tonight.”

“And what did you say?” he asked gently, leaning in towards her.

“I said that we were busy tonight.” She said with a cheeky grin, crossing her creamy legs under her knee-length pink skirt. “I really don’t think I’m in the mood to entertain visitors tonight.” She added. He wanted to bang her head on the coffee-table. His parents were *not *visitors. They were his revered creators. He—

The door-bell rang. “I’ll get it.” She said, jumping up and rushing to the door.

“Three hundred rupees ma’am.” Muthu heard a young man’s voice say. He walked nearer to the door, and hovered by the wall as his wife opened her wallet.

It was the ironing man back with his formal shirts. He looked down at the big-shopper bag the iron-man had placed in the doorway, and his eyes almost popped with shock: there on top of his crisp blue shirt was a bunch of Angelica’s bras! Large and pink, with ruffles and lace and flowers, they had been folded and placed on the top.

Muthu craned his neck and could now see the iron-man. He could see the cheek in the guys’ face, and the slight raise of his eye-brows as he scanned the plunging neck-line of his wife’s tank-top.

But Angelica didn’t seem to notice.

Or maybe she did.

When the iron-man had left and Angelica had sat back on the sofa, Muthu approached her, his blood frothing. Why did she do that? Why did she act that way? Why couldn’t she just behave like every other man’s wife? He cleared his throat.

“I don’t want that man to come here again.” He announced, his voice rising with each syllable. Angelica looked up at him, her blue eyes like water effortlessly dousing a pathetic fire.

“Why?” she asked, slightly amused, “you’re nostrils look funny when they flare.” Unfeigned he tried a new angle:

“Cover yourself up when you go to the door.”

“Why?” she asked again with a little laugh.

“Because he is looking at you!” he fired uncontrollably, “And why do you give your bras also?” He was a gun spluttering bullets everywhere.

“Oh come on honey, what’s the big deal?” she said with a little laugh, a care-free deer, “And didn’t *you* look at me like that before?” She asked, getting up and placing her hands on his shoulders.

“I don’t want him here ever.” He repeated; a gun out of ammunition.

“Then you tell him that.” She whispered, and she planted a slow, wet kiss on his neck. He opened his mouth, but instead of an onslaught of anger, out came a high-pitched squeak. Angelica laughed, then sat back down on the sofa.

It was always like this. They would fight, he would explode, and she would laugh. She had this way of *embarrassing* him; *emaciating *him. She was a horse that cantered and soared, and he could not throw the lasso around her; could not tame her; “Oh honey,” she said affectionately, “Don’t let it bother you. I know how protective you are. Come here.” And she pulled him onto the sofa with her, and stroked his arm as she opened up her book with her free hand.

Muthu, nestled within her body, sighed. She satisfied him in one way, but not the other. Which was more important? No, perhaps she just needed a little more coaxing. Perhaps she did not understand what her other duties as a wife was. He’d just gotten back and he was dying for a cup of coffee. Why didn’t it strike her?

He cleared his throat one more time.

It was a signal.

Anyone else would have understood.

Yes, she just needed a little help. Gingerly he began:

“Angie,”

“Hmm?” shaking with apprehension he half-whispered:

“Some coffee?” She looked into his dark face, her white skin never imbibing, only clashing.

“Sure honey, coffee would be great, with cream and sugar if you don’t mind.” 

