From: Aditi Kay<adity.kay@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: I, Vikarna, Must Have My Say Too
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

They had all wanted to marry her. She was the most beautiful princess in all the lands known and even farther away. Bards sang her praises. When sages blessed the young damsels, they did so in her name. *Be beauteous like the princess of Panchala and clever too.* For she, Draupadi wasn’t someone ordinary. Born out of the raging fires after her father, the King of Panchala, had prayed to every god possible.

It is true, all too often, the duties of a prince overshadow that of an ordinary being’s. I was a mere prince, lower down in the chain of command. But even I could see that it was never easy for older brother, Duryodhana. He was brought up as the crown prince, the heir. Uncle who was in any case younger than father, had gone away to the forest. Father was king. What the elders forgot was that father had every right to be king, and not just as a stand-in for uncle.

Sometimes when we spoke amongst ourselves and Duryodhana got very angry, we would think that this forgetting was all deliberate. Father was blind, but he was strong, and cautious. He held the kingdom together. Something more important than just fighting wars. That was my uncle Pandu’s forte. But keeping a kingdom together required courage and more, caution.

It was this caution that upset my brother. How could those upstarts simply come back from the forest and be treated on an equal footing, he asked? That was fair, I told him. They are our brothers too. And that was the first time, I remember, that I was shouted down. There might have been times before but was all vivid: How they rounded up on me, pummeled me to the floor, left me breathless and panting, and then left me tied up to that old neem tree, under that blazing sun. It was not just older brother but everyone else – Dussasana, Chitravarman, Durjaya, Sudarshana and the rest. You wouldn’t want to know their names really. No one bothered. There were always the two of them, Duryodhana and Dussasana and after that the rest of us. The Kauravas.

*Vikarna*, said Dussasana, looking at me, murder in his eyes, *remember who you are*. He would have killed me then had older brother not stepped in. It was so easy to meld into that band of brothers. I guess that’s why older brother knowing he was the eldest of us all, and for a long time, the crown prince, found it hard to be anything else. Anger, fury, and the very thought of revenge flowed from this.



The flies buzzed over my head, crowding into my thoughts, as I lay there on that battlefield. These were my last moments. If someone bent his head close to mine, maybe I could have told them. That it had been inevitable since that moment when the five brothers, orphaned, tired and almost starving came in from the forest, followed by their mother, my aunt. I had felt older brother’s drawn in breath. I had seen Dussasana’s clenched fists.

And since that day, as slowly the Pandavas, our five cousins, inveigled themselves into everyone’s favour, won everyone’s approval, it was ordained. Even father with his abundant caution knew, and did all he could. How long can anyone put off hate?

The dust clouds loomed over my head. Something flowed into my right eye, the one still left open. It didn’t matter. I could see things, life itself with a blinding clarity now. I heard dim shouts. Almost familiar. The way Bheem always taunted Duryodhana and all the others. Till finally older brother thought up that ruse to poison him. Why were they not allowed to fight it out? In a duel, the two of them, could have wrestled each other to death. It’d have proved who was the best mace wielder of all time. The rest of us would have been spared this horrible, ignominious death. A death most deserving. A death, we Kauravas, were just waiting for. All for the sake of older brother.

There would be no one to weep for me. I did see the pity in brother Bheem’s eyes, moments after I had staggered and fallen under that last blow of his mace. Only he could have lifted that heavy rounded piece of metal so effortlessly. It came so lightly toward me and he was so quick on his feet, I could have done little to avoid it. Maybe I didn’t want to any more.

I felt that blow, like a hundred and more horses pounding over me, their hooves grounding me to dust. It was like a thousand and more trees smashing down on me, striking me with their branches and I, too entangled, couldn’t pull myself away. It was like being crushed to bits, or burnt alive, struck down by several lightning strikes, and for all the heat around me, the sound of battle diminishing and rising over me, faint and going farther away, mingling with the dust that rose like a cloud, and settled like a hot iron blanket on my body, the flies greedy over me, the pounding in my head, I heard too the sound of mountains moving close, the earth trembling and I knew it was the sound of my last dying breaths. The earth was, after all, in me. But I’d not return to it without having my say.



It is easy to think that at the very end of this life, when little remains of what has been, as most of us will never realize, the most magnificent gift of all, the truth that has evaded us emerges most clearly and blindingly. It was envy. Raw, plain, unassuaged and unabated that drove older brother to all his acts. And between Dussasana and me, it seemed he always listened to second brother. The one who always echoed him. His shadow, the more loyal brother. While I was the one who always had to butt in, the one who said the things older brother never wanted to hear.

Half-brother Yuyutsu was never one of us. He could go and snitch on us. He was the one who warned Bheem of the plan to have his food poisoned. I could warn but never betray. Sometimes the warning came too late.

It wasn’t courage that made me stand up in the open court, face the elders, tell them it was all a monstrous injustice. It wasn’t just the queen of Indraprastha, the princess of Panchala, our sister in law who was being humiliated, but a woman. How could all of us just sit there, looking on, when in just a few moments, the entire order of things, all notions of truth, justice, honour and duty, had been upended, turned over, so nothing would ever again be the same.

But all this might not have happened. If I had spoken up earlier. If I had had more courage. If I had had not been a coward for too long. If I not lived in confusion, caught between loyalty to the Kauravas, and duty to older brother.

But I am not being honest. For there was envy too, on my part.

I remember the day of the archery competition. And I saw the golden glow around the young warrior as he came up to take his turn. He had us all mesmerized. Tall, with his bronzed skin, the glow on his armour and earrings. He seemed blessed by the sun god himself. He would have won easily. I saw it from the manner he lifted the bow, the way he knelt and how his arms stretched on the bowstring. Before Guru Drona rose and stopped him. Before older brother rose too and stopped Guru and everyone else with his glorious act of generosity. The son of a charioteer became a king. If older brother could show such magnanimity, why didn’t he acknowledge the Pandavas’ simple demand for five villages?

But I knew that very moment when older brother embraced Karna and placed that metal crown on his head, that with the archer on his side, older brother had an ace up his sleeve. It was evident in that glint in older brother’s flashing hazel green eyes, the ease in his stride, as he held Karna’s arm up and the crowd cheered. I was the only one who watched in silence. I saw that Dussasana saw too. He read my envy clearly. I was now further removed from older brother’s attention. Karna and Dussasana obeyed his every command and Uncle Shakuni had his very ear.



It was afternoon, the harvest was full in the granaries, and everywhere it was a time of rejoicing. The people were happy. The Pandavas were to visit Hastinapura, and sister in law too. I paced the terrace, waiting for a glimpse of her. My brothers hated her, and they had every reason. While older brother’s anger made me afraid. For I had been witness to his humiliation. The way sister in law had laughed, the sound like soft pearls scattering themselves on the smooth marble floor, when older brother walked into a pool of water, mistaking it for a mirror.

I might have warned him. I failed, for from another mirror, I had seen sister in law’s approach and could not turn my eyes away. Her long lustrous hair hanging like a dark cloud behind her, her flashing eyes, the dark oval face, and her gait, the sound of her anklets on the stone steps like the earth itself singing.

Older brother saw me only as he turned away, her taunt ringing in his ears, the water clinging to his fine silk clothes. My silence was a cover-up for my own humiliation. I had been caught in my own hopeless love. You could say from then on older brother hated me. A bit less than his hatred for the Pandavas, but it existed, nevertheless.

I felt that gaze on me that terrible afternoon. An afternoon people will talk about for centuries and eons, an afternoon very unlike this one when I did fight like a warrior for my older brother and gave my life for him. But who will ever know this? Who will listen to me speak about loyalty and how a treacherous loyalty can tear a person apart?

But there is always a higher loyalty. I knew that, though my legs trembled and my mouth ran dry. Still I made myself think over and listen to every word as it left my lips. Sister in law had been dragged before the open assembly by her hair, by her sari that unraveled before our horrified eyes as Dussasana pulled her in. If the laughter of everyone was muted, it was because we wanted to hear her wail, to plead for her modesty, her shame.

My brothers said she was a slave now, our slave. Someone to do our every bidding.

The elders looked away. Bhishma, Drona, Kripacharya, did not speak up. I looked at every face and then rose. I heard myself say the words. Stop. You cannot do this.

But as one, they shouted at me. The archer Karna mocked me. Older brother looked at me stunned, with the same hatred I had seen before. The hatred I know is my due as I lie here dying. I will be a hated figure, for my long silence, for not being able to stop older brother in time. For speaking up too late.

*Water. *And I felt drops on my face. I felt the sun go behind a cloud as someone cradled me, lifting my bruised, bleeding head onto his lap. I heard Bheem’s voice very close. *Brave Vikarna. Only you know what dharma is about.* I did not hear his last words, his tears fell on my lips and in that moment, my thirst left me.

 



