From: Narendra Patel<narendrapateljc@gmail.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Forms of Dissent
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Geeta is a devoted traditional housewife. She’s married into a remote and orthodox family and has lived most part of her life confined to the household, rather to the kitchen to be more specific. Cooking meals, raising kids and fasting for her husband’s long life are her duties, a job that she performs round the clock and excels at. She‘s not allowed to anything else let alone be ready to be branded with some indescribable terms. With all this she deserves to be treated with respect and her work appreciated.

But alas, that’s not the case. Her husband constantly admonishes her for not bearing a boy. Mostly drunken, he treats her like a personal servant, who should be available at all times to fulfil her master’s desire. Even if that involves things against her wishes!

Marital rape, abuse, torture, and utter disregards to her self-respect are things that are not unusual to her. Yet, she has to bear it because her husband is her god, someone to whom she’s been tied to for the next seven lives. Weep in a corner for a few minutes and then get back on the job of being the dutiful wife.

The only happiness in her life is her daughter Meera. She’s the apple of her eye. She wishes to highly educate her so that she can live life on her own terms and not a restrained one like her.

But one day her husband crosses all boundaries of decency. Under the influence of alcohol he turns on her daughter. Geeta tries to plead to him but he pushes her to a corner and moves ahead to commit the heinous crime.

Geeta drops down in the corner crying, all her dreams for her daughter shattered. But then suddenly something inside her flips up. She’s responsible for her daughter’s needs and security. She musters up all the courage inside her and marches towards her husband and registers a thundering slap on his face.

Shocked, he looks back expressionless. He’s never seen this side of her. It seems she’s possessed. Taking advantage of this she swiftly picks up her daughter and moves out of her house.

Now with the help of a local NGO she has filed a complaint against her husband and ensures that he’s behind the bars.

*“Remember Malala Yousafzai. It requires courage to show dissent. Geeta demonstrated an exemplary one!”*



Chintan was a regular guy. Nothing different, except for the choice of his sexuality! He was Gay!

He had recently started working and was already a hot topic of discussion in most of the office gossips. Particularly with his teammates who would constantly take unsavoury jibes at him. Lewd comments, indecent gestures and proposals were the norm.

Poor guy had to live with all of that and slowly it started affecting his work and life. He felt depressed and aloof which did not went unnoticed for long. His elder brother consulted him and he broke down and narrated everything. His brother calmly told him that his choice of sexuality is his basic right and nobody can challenge that. If you are scared or ashamed of it then you would always be taken advantage of. Sometimes simplicity is the solution to most of life’s problems. That sounded constructive and wise to Chintan.

The next day when his teammates were again at their thing, a calm Chintan went and confronted them. What was the problem? Was there anything wrong that he has done to be ridiculed in this sort of manner? How can he avoid it or what would it take to end this?

Everyone was stunned. Some stuttered and stammered, but no one was able to speak up. Chintan coolly walked back to his desk and continued with his work. He felt relieved and happy about the whole situation. This was probably all that was required.

Now the jabbering has stopped and he’s on good terms with his colleagues.

*“Sometimes it just requires one to speak up to show dissent. Chintan demonstrated it in the simplest manner.”*



There was a tea stall close to a highway connecting to a world class city. It was where Raju worked. Except for the fact that he was just eight years old!

He had to work to support his poor family who lived on daily income and had no means to send him to school. He would toil hard all day long sometimes even getting thrashed by the owner. He had never experienced childhood.

A lot of customers would flock to the tea stall for their cup of refreshment. Most of them were ignorant of him. Some however noticed, but it only remained a point of discussions over their hot beverage or resulted in an occasional tip to the boy. Few did reprimand the owner for hiring him but that was it. In this fast paced life no one had time for themselves let alone someone like him.

Rahul, however was an exception. Upon seeing the boy’s condition he took it upon himself to make amends. With the help of a child care institution he managed to get the boy out of his plight and into a school where he has a future. Also he intimated the local police and put the owner behind the bars for illegally hiring underage children at work. Now he periodically visits the boy, supports his education and is actively collecting funds to manage the boy’s needs.

Raju could not have been happier than this and it shows up in his wide smile.

*“Sometimes mere words are not enough to exhibit dissent. It needs to be justified with actions. Rahul managed to do just the same. Remeber Nobel laureate Kailash Satyarthi?”*



Seema was a socialite and philanthropist. She was popular and her pictures would appear almost daily in the page3 section of newspapers. Seema was a part of almost all high profile events and soirees that would happen in the city. She was also quite active on the societal front as well and would regularly organize sit down dinners and charity events to support various noble causes.

One such event was the Diwali party that she had organised for the under privileged kids. It was also graced by many socialite friends of hers. The media had made a beeline outside the venue to cover the event.

Food and drinks were in abundance, along with music and games for the children. She had also made arrangements for gifts for the kids as well. Everyone was happy and it could be felt in the atmosphere.

Everyone present spoke about how important it was to support noble causes like this and praised Seema eloquently for doing so and posed for pictures with the kids with the media lapping it up.

During one such picture a small girl tried to get close to her and hugged her. Seema swiftly pusher her aside before anyone could see. The rustic girl could potentially spoil her white dress and her pictures would appear bad in the print and the media might not put it up in the papers.

She had invested a lot in it and could not take a chance of missing out at her own event. It was all a gimmick on her part to remain in the news and be relevant. All the social events that she conducts are all a well crafted ploy to achieve the coveted goal.

She was projected as a voice of the poor, a good person but underneath this entire gamut of things she was just a social butterfly who kept frolicking from one flower to another just to be relevant and never had any intentions to contribute to the causes that she supposedly supported.

However, slowly her actions started describing her intentions. People saw the reality behind her masked expressions and started distancing themselves from her until she had no one to support. She then faded into oblivion.

*“Dissent requires belief and clarity in your vision and mission. Anything less than that is not acceptable. Seema is an example of that. ”*



Priya is the youngest child of the Thakur family. Her family has been the most illustrious one in the village for generations. Her father was the sarpanch of the village. Hence, she was well looked after and all her needs taken care of.

Rupal was the daughter of Manek who worked as the driver at the Thakur’s place. She and Priya were classmates and best friends.

One day the toilet at the Thakur’s place got full and needed clean up. Manek was instructed and his wife and daughter were called in. They would be performing manual scavenging of the toilet to clean it up.

Toilets were a rarity in this remote village and only a few had the privilege of it. However they were all primitive toilets that required cleaning and maintenance.

Young Priya however did not approve of it. She had read in school about how manual scavenging is an offense and banned as a criminal activity. She requested her mother to stop the work and also pressed for the need to build a modern toilet with proper drainage system. Her mother however shoed her away, saying this is going on from decades and it is also the way to show this people their place who otherwise would try to outdo them.

Still Priya could not take it. She decided to protest, in her own small form. She joined the mother – daughter duo in the manual scavenging process. Soon other kids from the family also joined in. This enraged her mother and she came and ordered the servants to pick her up. She did not want to touch her, lest she also get dirty with the excreta spread on Priya’s clothes. She ordered all the children to be sent back to their rooms and Priya to be locked in her bedroom for the remainder of the day. The servants took the kids and executed the instructions.

Her protest did end abruptly. But it was good start. It paved way for the future where she would play a major role in changing the dynamics of the village.

*“Sometimes dissent may not succeed, but it’s worth trying. Remember the 1857 mutiny? It did paved way for India’s freedom. Priya did quite the same although on a much smaller scale.”*



Poonam was a very good looking lady, but equally brilliant and hard working. With quality work and dedication she managed to reach a good position.

However naysayers would gossip as to how she was pleasing the top brass with her charms which resulted in her success. She had to face a lot of these. However that did not deterred her. She bravely faced it.

Poonam worked hard day in and out. Slowly it started showing up and getting noticed. Now she’s considered to be one of the topmost workers in her field. No more is she just a pretty face but a voice – a voice of dissent that proved everyone wrong.

*“Showing dissent may not always be simple. It may require immense efforts and pain. Remember the Mountain Man Dashrath Manjhi who toiled for decades to drive home his dissent. Poonam did her small role in the same direction.”*



Ramkumar was a cashier in a government owned Bank. A honest man by nature, he was irked when he found out that his manager was siphoning off funds from the bank. He lodges a formal complaint against him. But the smart manager using his position turned tables and instead accused him of the crime. He managed to get his colleagues side with him against Ramkumar.

Ramkumar felt isolated but he did not give up. He did a sting operation to bring out the truth and made the corrupt manager pay for his sins.

“Dissent may involve isolation. But if you’re right then you will eventually succeed. Galileo was also isolated initially but then got his due eventually.” 

