From: Sharon Puthur<sharon.jputhur@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: A Few Moments of Silence
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

I was staring into the mirror, searching desperately for any discrepancy in my features. There were whispers around me and I tried to ignore them. My eyes looked strained and I immediately picked up the mascara. Outside my window a strange cry sounded. I ignored it but it began to echo painfully in my ears. I covered my ears but the cry continued monotonously, demanding attention.

It was a baby bat in broad daylight cornered by three crows. It tried blindly and in vain to scare them but they took turns at pecking it. I observed dispassionately wondering if I could do anything at all. Wasn’t it all part of nature? Should I interfere with nature or destiny? If there was a God then he observed just like this without lifting a finger. I was happy at that thought. I am like God with immense power to grant or take away life. I laughed loudly and there were whispers around me again. I wished they would stop. I wished the bat would die. I didn’t want a bat to judge my life. I shut the windows and drew the curtains.

Nikita was speaking in my head and I mouthed her words.

‘It was a bat but it was their food. You never snatch food from the hungry.’

And she laughed in the high pitched laugh that she had.

I’ve always admired Nikita but sometimes she could be testing. I never tell her that though because that’s how I was. She was always the Sun while I like the Moon reflected her light. It was a strange relationship and I’ve often wondered how we maintained it for so long. Nobody mentioned me without mentioning her in the same breath. It was as if I did not have an identity of my own. But I got used to it like how people get used to things.

‘I want to be famous one day.’ She said to me every other day. ‘I want to be known all over the world.’

I wanted it too but I dreamed of it only in the secret places of my heart. I wanted to be like Nikita, to be known and admired. I would shut myself in my room to be her. I tried to talk like she did, or comb my hair the way she did, or dress up like she did, or walk like she did. And when I leave the room, I am myself again.

I believed that in life there were two things –the reality and what you interpreted out of the reality that you see. Most people only see one without seeing the other and that is why they do not understand. Our dependence, our inseparability needed much more to be understood. Her thoughts were my thoughts and my actions mirrored hers. Everyone believed that I became me because of her but in actual she became what she was because of my dependence on her. Her confidence increased with my under confidence. Her beauty and grace shone brighter through my awkwardness. Her strength reflected through my weakness. It was my ultimate sacrifice. I gave up myself to make her. Everyone knew what a sacrifice was and it always screamed to be heard, taking its due one day or the other. And like an artist I loved my creation, making her more perfect in the eyes of the world. Would I then not do anything to make her better and better? This was what people did not see in our relationship. And I guess even Nikita did not see how much she mattered to me in my life.

So when Nikita died, people grieved but nobody saw the sacrifice that went into it. The sacrifice that made her what she was and what made me who I am. She doesn’t understand it either.

‘I think I am beginning to understand you now.’ Nikita said. ‘I can see your mind clearly on that night.’ And she began to laugh.

My stomach started hurting. The night she was speaking of was the night she died, six years ago.

I usually stayed up overnight at the college library to study, after heavily bribing the librarian. I liked quiet places and when I am surrounded by famous names I feel important myself.

I was taking my usual break between pages by dreaming of being famous when I heard a scuffling outside the library. When the library door opened I instinctively turned out the light and went under the table. I heard male voices and a muffled moaning. The lights came on and bending from under the table I saw and understood everything.

Six boys from the college stood surrounding Nikita. A red scarf was tied around her mouth and another held her hands together. She was whimpering, the fear apparent on her face. One of the boys untied her mouth and she immediately pleaded.

‘Please, let me go. Don’t do anything to me. Please...’

The slap that echoed in the quiet library was so loud that Nikita crashed on to a shelf sending rows of books thundering to the ground. She began to weep and scream.

‘Somebody help me! Somebody please help me! Please help me!’

They tore upon her like hungry beasts, tearing her clothes off her body.

Fear chilled me to the bone but my mind was strangely calm. My phone was in my hand. I could inform anyone but I didn’t.

The first thought that crept in was disgust. Disgust towards Nikita. Why would she put herself in this situation? Not every girl got raped. I was untouched. I looked at the torn and discarded pieces of her clothing. It was a short scarlet dress, almost matching the colour of the scarf tied to her mouth. It had to be Nikita’s fault entirely and that was what made it so pathetic.

The grunts and laughter of the boys were punctuated by Nikita’s screams which went on for a long time. After a while there was no sound from her, probably because she fainted. But they did not stop.

I recoiled at the sight of her weakness. She was weak and pathetic like everyone else. My sacrifice came to nothing... my mind suddenly stopped and absorbed the word, toying with it, loving it. All the while it was me and now it became her. It is now her turn to sacrifice. When I said these words in my mind it felt good. For the first time, I felt strong. It was finally a role reversal. I was becoming stronger through her weakness. A strength and confidence I never felt before began coursing through me. It was exhilarating. I finally discovered my true strength. And I wouldn’t waste her sacrifice. No never! I would use it well. I wouldn’t make the mistake that she made and allow myself to get carried away. I knew what I should do.

My mind sped forwards, far beyond the reaches of consequences, towards glory and unparalleled fame. Everybody knew what happened after a rape. Tumult, uproar, indignation, male bashing, fight for justice, candle light vigils, processions, media coverage, and a place of honour for the girl and the noose for the men. I would rectify all the wrongs of Nikita and give her back her place of honour and a place in the hearts of the people. No one would ever forget her name. She would be famous just like she always wished for. It was the highest recognition she could get and I would do it for her. We would again be named together. She with me and me with her. But this time I would be the stronger one.

She was shifting on and off from consciousness to unconsciousness. A trickle of blood began to flow in a thin line before hardening to a stop. I wasn’t unduly worried. Sacrifice always involved pain. That is inevitable.

I was uncomfortable under the table and needed to use the bathroom. They were slowly coming off from her satiated and prepared to leave. One of them kicked her face with his boot, probably disgusted with the face that led him to temptation, a feeling which might turn to guilt later but with or without remorse. He kicked her again before they pulled him away and left.

I was glad to stretch, feeling the tingling flow of blood through my veins, giving life to my limbs. Nikita was in a terrible state. The extent of the harm was camouflaged by a mess of dry and wet blood. The wound on her face was bleeding, spilling blood into her half closed eyes. The scarf was still tied to her mouth, being the only piece of clothing on her. I picked up her torn clothes and laid them on her. She turned her head slowly towards me and opened her eyes. Her one eye was red with blood but she looked at me in silence. Over time I have tried to understand what her expression meant but I failed repeatedly. Those few moments of silent conversation would remain with me always.

I rubbed my eye and when I opened I had blood in it. I burst a capillary.

‘No,’ I moaned closing my eyes tightly. ‘Please stop. Please...’

I heard whispers around me again. Trauma... phobia... It was always words.

My tryst with words began after that night in the library. Nikita. Dead. Rape. Assault. Brutality. Unnatural sex. Shock. Disbelief. Protests. Interrogation. Interrogation. Interrogation.

Initially they did not believe my story. That I could be separated from my phone and my bag and be hiding in fear and watching the rape to describe it in detail was not acceptable to their sane minds. Nikita’s parents retched when I described it to them but not the police officers. They examined my story and my role from every angle. I stuck to every word of my story, referring to Nikita as ‘my best friend’ and my state of mind as ‘helpless and in unexplainable fear’. As I spoke the words again and again I believed in my heart that they were true. I believed that my body, mind and heart were in congruence with the story but later I realised that they were not.

The change that was inevitable happened later but at that time everything went as I imagined it would go. I identified the six rapists and especially noted the one who kicked her. The people hated him the most. I joined the protests and suggested even a memorial in her name in the campus. I was doing everything I possibly could; I didn’t leave a stone unturned for her. Nikita’s name was spoken of throughout the nation and so was mine. We were again inseparable but she was living through me.

When I reached the pinnacle of fame that the dreams started. It happened so suddenly that I knew the day and time. I was being raped. Repeatedly. And the pain! I felt it in every inch of me. A searing, burning pain piercing through my body. It happened night after night relentlessly, till I sat up in bed in unexplainable fear. Counselling, medications and prayers did not help. I dreaded the night, the bed and sleep. In my room where I pretended to be her, I saw her and spoke as her.

The whispers started again. I covered my ears and opened them. “...she responds only to the name Nikita...” I covered and opened. “...her body is protesting and fighting within itself...” I covered and opened. “...it’s psychological...maybe schizophrenia...” I covered my ears tightly and mouthed her words. ‘We are inseparable’

The pain started again deep in my stomach. I crawled on the floor and leaned against the wall. The pain went on and so did the words in my head.

 

