From: Aban Mukherji<mukherji.aban@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: The Wail
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

It was the time of day that Hilla liked best—when only the sound of bird calls enveloped the silence. Her veranda garden was still in shadow as she eased herself into her favourite easy chair, brought the little pouf with the fluffed-up cushion near her feet and gingerly raised one leg at a time to plant them comfortably on it. Now she could wait content to watch the morning unfold, to hear the muted murmur of the drowsy city. The flower-laden branches of her bougainvillea, heavy and drooping, jutting out of her trellis-work would soon be silhouetted by the burnished gold of the morning sun. And if she sat very still, with eyes half shut, then perhaps, just perhaps, the bulbul might come again, sway on the protruding branch and weave its clear notes into the rapidly rising medley of chirps and caws and coos, interspersed by the wail of the kites circling the dead, and the occasional trill of the kingfisher. But all she could hear was the deep-throated ‘caw-caw-caw- C-A-W’ of the solitary jungle crow which seemed to mimic the opening bars of Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony. And if even this longing could be stilled, then perhaps her ear might catch the cry of the peacocks on Malabar Hill that pierce the darkness but do not disturb the peace of the Towers of Silence—the final resting place of the faithful. 

Hilla would soon be eighty. She was at peace with the world but not with herself. “If only...” was prefixed to many of her thoughts. But even they lost the power to disturb her at this hour when the morning light revealed her garden to her each day, anew.  

Dattu, the mali, would squat on his haunches, gently loosening the earth in each flower-pot prior to re-potting the plants before the onset of the monsoon. The touch of his long gnarled fingers was as soft as butter on a baby’s skin, making the droopiest bloom revive. When he thought Hilla memsahib was not watching he would pet and scold his “children” by turn, admonishing them not to shame him by wilting and dying. Sometimes he would shed his reticence and confide in them, making them silent repositories of all his woes. 

Just the day before, waiting for Dattu to finish his work, Hilla found the monotonous rhythm of her afternoon, as she sat knitting, rudely broken by the sudden harshness in his raised voice railing against his Fate—his Karma—that had shattered his dreams to shards. That pishachini of a wife of his had given birth to another accursed girl. His voice had trailed off into the distant hum of traffic and only the click-clicking of Hilla’s needles had continued unabated.  

“Dattu refuses to see that sickly daughter of his,” Shobha, Hilla’s maid, stated matter-of-factly as she expertly shelled peas in Hilla’s comfortable kitchen. “That amangala of a wife should be grateful he hasn’t beaten her to a pulp for producing a second girl-child who can’t even suckle properly and disturbs our whole chawl with her inauspicious wails.” As a mother of two sons, Shobha could well afford her complacency; she had secured her rightful place in the preordained scheme of things. And Hillabai, herself a mother of sons, was sure to understand and sympathize. Hilla, whose unfulfilled longing for a daughter had remained yet another ‘If only...’ looked uncomprehendingly at her maid. She felt she had to intervene to stop that unheard wail of the baby girl she would never see. She had to say something, anything, to silence Shobha’s flow of detached condemnation; but the ring at the door had interrupted her intention.  

Hilla kept her eyes focused on the sacred tulsi, its dull green leaves still in shadow, untouched by the morning light. If only she could purge her mind of all thoughts, still the chattering in her head, and concentrate on her breathing. But uncontrollable thoughts that refused to be silenced, refused to be hidden in the attic of her mind; whirled unbidden into her consciousness. Her own mother's eyes, cold and rejecting flashed across her vision making her shrivel into painful oblivion. At eighty it was unfair to be troubled by servant problems—problems that didn’t even affect the smooth running of her home. But the ripples of disquiet wouldn’t subside. There was a burning in her eyes which only got worse when she shut them. Shobha’s words pounded her ears. “Just an hour before the naming ceremony of the unlucky baby the ladder near the loft slipped and fell on her head.” For a moment maid and mistress had stared into each other’s eyes, and each had fathomed the other’s thoughts. Hilla felt faint visualizing the perfectly timed fall of the ladder. “Hillabai, you should have seen the blood. It was all over the room. And that pishachin’s cry could even be heard in the neighbouring chawl. You should have seen the crowd that gathered around us as we rushed the baby to the hospital.” Shobha was quite breathless as she came to the end of her narrative. She had been sent by Dattu to wheedle a thousand rupees out of Hilla. “The doctors say that the unlucky child will survive, but with a damaged brain,” Shobha added almost gleefully as she pocketed the money. “The Fate of the poor thing is cracked in many places.”  

A cool breeze was playing with her plants and the morning sun had illuminated each petal of her pink oleander—a pink that would have surrounded her unborn daughter. Hilla’s heart was heavy with unshed tears for the unborn and the unloved. She closed her eyes though it was the time of day she loved best—surrounded by her beloved plants that had been cajoled into bloom by the gentle touch of her mali, Dattu; the father of the unwanted daughter. 

