From: Jyothi Vinod<jyothihs7019@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Kintsugi
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

It’s not every day a twenty-eight year old widow with children—twin girls at that—cloistered in her husband’s home for ten years, gets a proposal for marriage.

Ganesh is talking of wedding dates and our relocation to the U.S, when I tell him the answer is, no, and that he should get lost. It’s of no consequence to me that my in-laws approve the union of their elder son—now divorced—with the widow of their younger son, Rakesh. As it is, they wear too many halos.

They’d plucked me off the fields from a remote village near Sakleshpur when I was eighteen and a school dropout. My poor parents were ready to squeeze into the leather tote my mother-in-law—a noted classical singer Dr. Sharada Bhat—gripped in her bejeweled fist, and pledge servitude to the Bhat household for a lifetime. After my marriage and shocking widowhood a few days later, my father-in-law, a distinguished academician, Dr. Vittal Bhat, transplanted my parents and three younger siblings to Bangalore.

Ganesh has no intention of getting lost. There’s more than anger broiling behind those grave bespectacled eyes. I’m curious.

“Kalyani, it’s about Rakesh. You’ll change your decision when you’ve seen something.” He drapes another skin of mud colored cream over the cup’s edge before gulping down the tea. “Come with me this weekend.”

“I can’t leave Ridhi-Sidhi. Moreover, if you’re going to show me the place where Rakesh was mauled by the wild boar, I’m not interested.” In my opinion, any man impregnating his new bride, and leaving without explanation to go on a stupid trek was asking for it.

But in this maze my life has become, my in-laws write the signposts. They’re eager to mind the twins for the weekend because, ‘I need a change.’ For some strange reason, they think Ganesh is taking me to Mysore, while he informs me our destination is a small hamlet in the W. Ghats.

Ganesh ignores my questions and drives in silence. He could have been just any hired chauffeur. I cast my memory—a hole riddled fishing net—back ten years. Rakesh’s wristwatch and shreds of clothing were found beside a few skeletal remains a week after his friends lost him in the wilderness; only parts of him got a decent cremation. Ganesh assumes I pine for his brother—a husband I lived with for only a week. I don’t. Though, like an amputee, I’ve struggled with occasional twitches and aches in my phantom limb.

Throughout the drive, held in the captivity of the seat belt, the sight of rolling green fields stirs in me this desire to run barefoot, arms outstretched, eyes closed, into the horizon.

It’s evening when we stop at a roadside cafe. A dark green van comes hurtling down a side road and speeds away on the highway. We tail it for an hour till it takes a diversion and stops at the base of a small hillock. Eight lithe men dressed in black leap out of the vehicle. They lug a huge trunk between them. They disappear into a thicket, sometimes visible through the bushes as they climb. Ganesh chews his under lip and studies his wristwatch.

Eagles wheel in the crimson sky, their flutey whistles like wind chimes. The darkening foliage comes alive with the chirps of its roosting tenants. Invisible insects and frogs start to yodel. A cool breeze warns of a chilly night.

We wait for a while before we follow the men. There’s no habitation for miles. When blood curling cries, drumbeats, and cymbals rip the silence, I grab Ganesh’s arm. He shakes his head and presses his palm over my mouth when a fallen branch snakes away into the undergrowth. We reach a clearing and crouch behind bushes. Against the backdrop of a temple’s iron-grey ruins, eight figures wearing painted masks, dressed in magnificent costumes leap and dance to the music from a tape recorder: Yakshagana—song of the spirits.

 Twilight bathes the temple’s petrified sentinels. Tender green-gold leaves of a peepal tree quiver on the roof in an ecstasy of dissent—Nature reclaiming what’s rightfully hers. Long after the music stops, the air pulsates with color and movement.

We haven’t revealed ourselves. If these are the same friends Rakesh was with on that fateful trek, why was Ganesh choreographing this stealth and subterfuge? Why did they travel so far to dance in secrecy and then create a racket to rouse the dead? We could have flagged them down near the cafe. Or for God’s sake, this is 1980; we could have spoken over the phone.

The eight men embrace and stand in close pairs. They talk and laugh as they change out of their costumes and start to pitch tents. Ganesh walks up to them.

I hear raised angry voices. I’m terrified. Ganesh and I could end up dead here, and nobody would know. I’m filled with loathing for myself. When did I become this brainless creature dragged around on a leash?

 I see them stride towards me and jump to my feet. Two men follow Ganesh and stop near me. I search the faces and forget to breathe. The treachery explodes in my face. I dash down the slope. The root of a tree breaks my run and I fall. Feet pound the forest floor in close pursuit. They help me up. I recoil and back against a tree. Rough bark pierces my skin—a reassuring steadfastness in my rapidly dissolving world where murky waters submerge all that I’ve believed as truth. My wails silence the birds.

Rakesh kneels beside me. “Kalyani, I wish there was a way I could set you free.” He gestures towards the other men. “There’s no place in this world for us— twilight beings. The world breaks us, and then taunts our fractured existence. Twilight is not cowardice. It’s day poised on the threshold of night, uncertain, yet willing.”

 Nothing makes sense. I cover my ears and submit to his cascade of words.

 I finally splutter: “Ganesh, how long… have you known?”

“All along,” Ganesh says, with a triumphant smile.

The forest takes up the mocking refrain: Allalong, allalong…

Rakesh tugs the hand of the man beside Ganesh. “Mike, meet my wife… ex-wife.”

All I register is the black and white sweater Rakesh is wearing, the one his mother knitted last winter. For her husband, I’d thought. Where is Rakesh storing her other tokens of affection? In the home he shares with Mike, whose hand he doesn’t let go?

I curl up in fetal position on the car’s back seat. Ganesh is voluble on the return journey: Rakesh and his friends have been attacked before; dance practice is a cover for the lovers’ tryst; he doesn’t know where they live or work; his parents are too old to make the occasional trip so he’s been here, though unwelcome, a few times, last weekend of the month; she was never supposed to know, but then, he believes transparency with his future wife…

 #

It’s a week since I met Rakesh. I haven’t spoken to anyone except the children. After they leave for school I haunt the rooms. Ten servants work round the clock in the house and garden; I’ve done nothing all these years except watch my children and the plants grow.

This hundred-year-old bungalow stands like a formidable monument. Today there’s an air of walking amidst ruins—a reek of loss and decay. All the secrets it helped contain have colluded to implode in its regal face.

I enter the huge room where music lies imprisoned in tanpuras and tuning boxes, waiting for her golden voice to release them. Newspaper reports claim gods are invoked when she sings. Ancient music runs in her blood. Her famed forefathers—maestros—stare grimly from old photographs. Her work with destitute women and children, and her many concerts whose proceeds go to charity, will elevate her to sainthood someday. I’ve no ear or talent for her music; the song of the river, the wind in the leaves, the clamor of birds, and the sound of falling rain is the music I crave.

My father-in-law’s huge study-cum-library is a more familiar place. Framed certificates and commendation letters from foreign universities where he delivers guest lectures, line one wall. Photographs, in which he smiles in the company of foreign professors and students, sit on the desk. Huge black and white portraits of his father and uncles—all renowned scholars—adorn the wall above his table. Books, their names inscribed on firm, upright spines fill the other wall. I’ve borrowed from here—mainly fiction and travelogues—snippets of freedom; the only time I’ve escaped this oppressive abode.

It didn’t impress them when I passed tenth grade after the twins started school, and enrolled for a diploma in Interior Decoration at the polytechnic college on the next street; that’s as far as my leash allowed me. As for putting my diploma to use, the only place I’m allowed to redecorate in this twenty-room house is my own room. My parents and siblings have a nice home on that street.

There are locks to my prison: my father has a decorative post in one of the colleges my father-in-law visits for guest lectures; my younger brothers have college degrees and job offers; my sister is in high school, the same school my daughters go to.

I crawl onto the window seat in my bedroom. A tailor bird couple builds a home in the parijata tree. Using their feet to align leaves, they stitch leaves with blades of grass. Every day at dawn this tree indulges in self-worship. Today a single saffron-stemmed white blossom struggles, trapped in a spider’s gossamer web. The silken bondage is deceptively fragile; it will take a storm to free the flower.

 #

Dawn is a good time. I’m glad they agreed to meet me in the study. When my parents and siblings arrive, they join Ganesh and my in-laws without the slightest hesitation. Ganesh won’t look at me. He comforts his mother who looks like she’ll never stop crying. My father-in-law sips tea from a fine bone china cup and his eyes bore mine. Nobody speaks.

I cross my arms and embrace myself. “I will divorce Rakesh. It’s time Ridhi and Sidhi met their father.” A tea cup flies across the room, and crashes at my feet.

“Ungrateful wretch! One sentence from your vile mouth has brought this venerable edifice down,” he says. Odd words—something his forefather would have uttered a hundred years ago.

My mother-in-law walks up to me, takes my hand in hers, and says, “Kalyani, don’t be heartless. The shame will destroy us, especially Rakesh.”

I snatch my hand away. “Who threatened to drink poison when Rakesh professed his love for Mike? Who blackmailed him into marriage with me? Who drove him to a life of subterranean disgrace?”

“Sharada, let her go. A few homeless days on the streets with her parents and siblings will do her good,” my father-in-law shouts. My parents look alarmed.

“Dawn is courage—a night poised on the threshold of daylight, sure and willing,” I chant over and over again, as I pick the pieces of bone china.

 I place the shards on the table. “Heard of Kintsugi?” I ask.

They exchange glances. They probably think I’m mad.

“Kintsugi is the Japanese art of repairing broken pottery with no effort made to hide flaws. In fact, damage highlighted by precious metal is displayed as art. I desperately want to heal my life of its cracks and fissures, and live openly with the scars. I’m tired of running for cover because a faceless society is watching. You must try it too.” I’ve never known such exhilaration—the release that comes with dissent. “I didn’t make this up. It’s in one of your Japanese travelogues.”

“We’re human beings, not porcelain,” Ganesh informs me.

“I agree, only more fragile.”

I step outside the study into a world awash with daylight. 

