From: Prachi Percy Sharma<prachikd923@gmail.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: A Call to Ransom
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Friday, Nov the 4th, 2016

The sound of shattering glass brought sudden ebb in the cacophony within the cavernous lobby of City Mall. People turned around from their conversations and looked on, transfixed, as a group of men, holding placards, entered the mall, stomping over the broken glass.

“Krish Mehra Shame Shame! Krish Mehra Shame Shame!” the group shouted, repeating the words like a chant, the same words written on the placards below a photo of Krish Mehra, a big time Bollywood director and CEO of Karma Productions.

That the marauding mob also had people carrying batons and hockey sticks dawned on the spectators belatedly, and they started yelling- short, sporadic screams followed by the sound of running feet. There was a scramble to get out of the way of the mob, causing a mini-stampede, made worse by the marauders shoving aside people to ride the escalators and elevators to go upstairs.

Minutes later more people would come down in the elevators and from the stairs, screaming and scrambling to get out. Within a half hour, the mall would be mostly empty, the stores deserted, the gaming arcade empty, the escalators ground to a halt, the food court all messy with unfinished plates of food and glasses of drink lying everywhere, and prepared food left in the kitchens.

At last, from the elevators, would descend members of the marauding mobs, clutching burgers and half-finished burritos and glasses of chocolate milkshake and coffee purloined from the food court. Smiles on their faces, they would walk out of the mall, dropping the placards in the lobby, stepping over the unconscious body of the guard at the entrance. Behind they would leave broken glass, two more heavily injured guards within the mall, a man badly beaten in the projector room of Auditorium No. 5 in the multiplex on the top floor, broken neon billboards and an ominous, foreboding silence.

Several hours after they left, two police jeeps and a fleet of ambulances arrived at the theatre. Minutes after, they were followed by an Audi. Out stepped Krish Mehra himself, and ran inside the theatre.

More people arrived at the scene- media vans, from which poured forth a battalion of reporters.

-----

6th October, 2016

The Times of India, Mumbai Edition, Front Page

Krish Mehra’s Dil-O-Jaan runs into trouble with MJS 

Mumbai: Bollywood top director Krish Mehra’s next romance caper, Dil-O-Jaan, has ran in trouble with local political party Marathi Jagaran Sena,, for casting Pakistani actor Muzammil Ali. Although Ali only has a cameo in the movie, starring Rajesh Kapoor, Aditi Saha and Alisha Gilani in the lead roles, Ali’s casting has become an issue because of the escalated tensions between India and Pakistan.

“They kill our soldiers on the border, they kill our soldiers in Kashmir! This is unacceptable. Why should we then let them star in our movies? Why should we allow Pakistanis to make money in India? Why should they benefit from India in any way? Cast these people out of our country! All Pakistani actors and singers should leave Mumbai within the next 48 hours!” says MJS leader Ram Chitnis.

MJS, which has a nationalist basis in ideology, regards Pakistani actors and artistes as anathema to India. Earlier this year, a concert by ghazal maestro Mehmood Khan was forcefully canceled, on orders of the MJS, which threatened the organizers with violence and vandalism if its demands weren’t complied with.

“We will vandalize theatres if this film is screened anywhere in Mumbai. The Maharashtra government should ban this film if it has any regards for the integrity of India and for the sacrifices our soldiers have made at the border, fighting to save our country from these Pakistanis. They are not welcome here anymore,” contends Chitnis, who holds a PhD in political science from Delhi University.

Krish Mehra, when asked, dismisses these comments as typical rabble rousing by the likes of MJS.

“What do these morons think? They feel they can hold us filmmakers to ransom with their empty threats? They think they can take away our freedom of expression for their narrow political gains and rabid ideologies? Dil-O-Jaan will go ahead and it will star Muzammil as decided. It will release and I’m sure people will come to watch it. The MJS cannot dictate who can star in my films or what the public can or cannot watch,” quips the outspoken Mehra, in his office at Versova.

This is not the first time Krish’s films have run into trouble with MJS. His 2013 film ‘Jihad-e-Jannat’ courted their ire for putting a bare-backed Kusum Kocchar on the movie poster. Protestors belonging to MJS vandalized billboards carrying the movie posters and threatened to vandalize theatres- a threat they didn’t act upon.

With the surgical strikes conducted by the Army to curtail cross-border terrorism, engagement with Pakistan in any manner has become a contentious issue in India. The Indian government hasn’t made any statements banning Pakistani actors or revoking their visas, and neither has the Maharashtra government, which has a Jan Sanghatan man as CM. Yet a debate is raging on social media as to whether, after the latest attack on Indian Army in J&K, India should show any warmth towards its backstabbing neighbor.

But Mehra remains positive of the outcome.

“Last I checked, India is a democracy. Leaders like Chitnis think they can intimidate directors and actors by running their own parallel dictatorship here. Why? Why should we bow down to these lowlifes who have no other jobs? These people can make an issue out of anything to feed their narrow political interests. They have done nothing to further India or its people when we provide employment to thousands of people and take Indian culture to the world. We also have the government and the Constitution on our side. Let them make their empty threats. Barking dogs seldom bite, after all.”

Mehra has again shown he’s fearless in his usual brutally honest manner. Only time will tell what dividends this will reap.

Dil-O-Jaan, a Karma Productions feature, is slated for release on November the 6th.

----

23rd October, 2016 

Daily News and Analysis, Front Page

Pay 5 million to release DOJ in Maharashtra- Ram Chitnis

Mumbai: Amidst rising political tensions between India and Pakistan, and increasing decibel levels of demands for the ouster of Pakistani artistes from India through a ban, director Krish Mehra’s impending release, Dil-O-Jaan, continues to court trouble for casting a Pakistani actor. In the latest instance, MJS leader Ram Chitnis has demanded that Mehra, the CEO of Karma Productions, pay 5 million rupees to his party to be ‘allowed’ to release the film in Maharashtra.

‘If Mr. Mehra doesn’t donate the money on time, we will not allow the release of the movie. Our boys will vandalize theatres and disrupt screenings,” said Mr. Chitnis in a candid interview.

Krish Mehra pooh-poohed the demands.

“Who are these people to allow or disallow anything? Their political hate-mongering wasn’t enough? Now they will actually hold filmmakers to ransom? I am not going to pay for my creative freedom, which is my constitutional right. I’m not going to back down from casting actors from other countries into my films just because Chitnis says so. This is a democracy and not his goonda raj, where he gets to arm-twist people into acting out his agenda! I’m not paying a penny to any Tom, Dick and Harry who thinks they’re above the laws of the land! The film will release and Muzammil will take part in the promotions, as usual. I’ll provide for his security if these goons try to intimidate him! Art does not bow down to the parochial agendas of lumpen elements like Ram Chitnis!” thundered Mehra, at a press conference at the Taj Hotel in Colaba.

When asked about the threats to vandalize cinema halls and disrupt screenings, Mehra was equally candid.

“Let them do whatever the hell they please- let them try. We will all see who can stop Mumbaikars from watching a film they like and which stars all their favorite actors. Muzammil has a considerable fan following in India. His fans wouldn’t give up on him, I’m sure of it. I’m tired of these jobless morons trying to punish us for claiming our constitutional rights. I’m tired of these people trying to scare us and curb our freedom of expression and trying to dictate what we should eat, drink and wear and whom to marry. I’m not afraid of these morons in the least!” Mehra asserted, to loud applause from the audience and reporters.

-----

Friday, November the 6th 

Krish stood inside the lobby of City Mall, watching as paramedics carried the injured guards and projector room man to the waiting ambulances. He was standing rooted to his place, tears pouring forth from his eyes, holding one of the numerous placards lying on the floor, painted with slogans shaming him.

Outside, on the forecourt stood a gaggle of reporters with their camerapersons from all major news channels, local and national.

“Today, on the release date of Dil-O-Jaan, Krish Mehra’s latest movie under the banner of Karma Productions, a highly inauspicious incident has taken place. Police suspect that the mall was vandalized and the screening interrupted by activists belonging to the Marathi Jagaran Sena, as MJS leader Ram Chitnis had threatened weeks ago,” one reporter spoke into the camera.

“One of the cops who just inspected the multiplex upstairs has just confirmed that the protestors broke the screens inside the multiplex auditoriums, beat up guards and also vandalized neon signboards of Dil-O-Jaan. He also confirmed that Krish Mehra himself is inside the mall, inspecting the damage caused due to his refusal to stop the release of his film and bribe the MJS,” another spoke into another camera.

Police were not letting reporters inside the mall.

Inside the lobby, Senior Inspector Julio Menezes walked up to Krish.

“I’m so sorry, Mr. Mehra. This must be so upsetting for you.”

“I…never meant for…this to happen. I had no idea they would do such a thing. I didn’t think they would actually stoop so low just for political propaganda,” Krish replied.

“What to do, Mr. Mehra. Mumbai has been sold to the savages by both our politicians and the police itself. We ourselves won’t be able to catch the perpetrators, because I’m sure they have political backing from that bastard Chitnis.”

After an hour, once the situation had been milked for every ounce of TRP it could provide, the reporters started leaving. The ambulances had already left long back. After the media vans drove away, the police also drove away, their work completed. The damage had been surveyed, photographed and the evidence collected.

Krish’s Audi was the last to drive off, leaving the mall in darkness and desolation, like an old, ruined concrete monument.


-----


November the 8th 

Times Now 

Breaking News: Protestors vandalize more theatres and malls in Mumbai for screening Dil-O-Jaan.

Police allege they belong to the MJS

Distributors and theatre owners unanimously decide to stop the screening of Dil-O-Jaan

Police Superintendent of Mumbai publicly pleads MJS to stop the violence

PVR has already pulled our DOJ from all its multiplexes

Krish Mehra declines to comment on the fiasco 

