From: Chirag Tulsiani<writer.chirag@gmail.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: The Photograph
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Every time a cow is missing in the State, Mohan is summoned from the tannery.

He dips his hands in the dirty water and rushes home. Like always, the cow surveyors suspect his family. They are, after all, the only beef eaters in the State.

Upon reaching home, he finds his wife and nine year old naked, the surveyors taking pictures of them with their complying phones. Some take pictures of only his wife, some of only his daughter and some of both.

He removes his vest and shorts and stands before his wife and daughter. Since the beef ban, Mohan’s collar bones have come prominent while his ribs, visible. He bows his head but his wife and daughter aren’t allowed to. They are not even allowed to cover their bodies with their hands.

The surveyors touch the ground to see if it is wet and sniff for a hint of phenyl. When they seem convinced, they tell him that the tanneries will soon shut down. The men leave knowing well that a cow or two could have wandered off. There are so many of them after all.

Mohan’s daughter wipes her tears with her foot. His wife makes their daughter wear her frock and only then does she put her hands in her blouse. With her head covered with a dupatta, she looks like any other woman in the State.

Same day, the State Minister honoured Nandini with a shawl. He gave her a bouquet and folded his hands before her. He asked Nandini to look towards the cameras for a photograph but by then she had already started to graze on the bouquet. She was rewarded for having produced the most amount of milk in a month.

Mohan sat under a tree crying while Nandini walked with a sense of pride letting the world know of her recent achievement. He got up when he saw Nandini and said,

‘Madam Ji, please go away. If they find the us together, they will think I have stolen you.’

When Nandini did not leave, Mohan suggested, ‘If you don’t go, I will.’

He started to walk away from her, only to find her following him. When he stopped, she stopped. Mohan went back and sat under the giant tree and told her how the disappearance of cows was no fault of his own but a coincidence.

‘Yes, we are poor, but not thieves.’

Next day, Nandini sat on the lane by which The Minister’s convoy passed every day. Cow dung lay all over the gifted shawl. When the cow hadn’t moved for hours and was supposedly on a strike, Sadanand, a lip reader was called upon.

It was a protest against the beef ban.

‘When the humans already use my milk, dung and urine, what’s the harm with using my flesh?’ she said.

With the elections round the corner, the opposition found a strong candidate in Nandini. From the online archives, the State Media had started deleting the multiple photos in which Nandini and the Minister appeared together. Her name was struck off from official records. The photograph was strongly condemned and there were headlines that The Minister was bowing to the next Chief Minister.

‘We turned blood into milk,’ he said, ‘Continue to love us, and we’ll do big-big things for you.’

The Minister ordered to his troops to take care of the matter. He could not afford to lose the elections to a cow. He realised he would be the first to do so. That is if it did happen.

With gulaal, they wrote ‘whore’ on her body. The land where she tilled the soil was seized. And she was soon called a Pakistani cow for having swished her tail to Ahmed Rushdi.

‘Milkmen do not add adulterants to Nandini’s milk,’ the Minister said, ‘Ask why?’

‘Why?’

‘Because it’s already adulterated.’

When Mohan found Nandini by the lake, he jumped out of the fear that someone might find him. Mohan placed the palm of his hand on Nandini and rubbed the part which said whore. He washed it. He took Nandini and introduced her to his wife and daughter. He slapped his daughter’s head asking her to touch Nandini’s feet. They fed her but Nandini didn’t wish to leave until Mohan’s wife took out some milk.

‘We are trying to save animals from her biradri and she wants them killed. You want such an animal as your Chief Minister?’

The Minister put a surveillance team on those all who consumed Nandini’s products.

‘Those who consume Nandini’s milk are today in Tihar.’

He imposed a ban on Nandini which meant her milk, urine and dung could not be used for any purposes. Nandini was worried for she knew it could effect livelihoods.

‘When you don’t kill cows, then you kill mosquitoes?’ she said.

Nandini through Sadanand promised the people of the State individual freedoms.

‘Today they don’t want you to eat what you want. Tomorrow they won’t let you love who you want. Freedom is the ability to choose, and the ability to choose is what we are fighting for.

What tipped the elections in Nandini’s favour was that her ‘white poison’ was responsible in the nurturing of abandoned girls.

Also a scandal had broken out where the Minister was caught saying,

‘I’ll behead her and hang her carcass for the world to see.’

This after he had banned the killing of cows.

The earth beneath them had deep cracks. The ex-Minister turned around to see Nandini approaching towards him. He came with a cleaver behind his back.

‘You want cows killed, eh? Why don’t we start with you?’

But just then a UFO appeared. It emitted a yellow light and the alien spaceship took Nandini away.

Next day, a painter was seen painting a mural of Nandini on a battered wall.

The Photograph looks different now. It is not Nandini who is scratched out but the ex-Minister. He has been replaced by Mohan. 

