From: Pravin Vemuri<pravinvemuri@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: Anticlimax
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

1.

The story ends. The music stops. The sepia tones dissolve. The man gets up from the bed, cleans himself and moves to the mirror to get dressed. He regards the woman in the bed through the mirror. The woman in the bed stretches and squints her eyes as she yawns. The man lights a cigarette and fixes his tie. The woman cleans up and walks up next to the man to get dressed.

This version was so much better than the last, he says. He says this to her through the mirror with a smile. The woman shrugs at him with her chin held to her chest. She exhales through her mouth as she fixes the end of her dress. She shrugs at him through the mirror as she exhales.

When they are ready, they step inside the cupboard and close its doors. The cupboard pulls back into a vestibule which shoots off along all the axes but not in the same proportion. It goes up, north, down, west, up-south-east and then down-west the rest of the way.

2.

When it stops, the woman opens her half of the door and in the light that falls upon her, the man notices the changes in her. She’s darker, has more lines around her eyes and is a bit fuller somehow. He’s changed too, he’s bulkier and has the beginning of a bald patch. He can feel it even before he reaches his hand out to touch.

They step out into a forest which thickens all around them. We haven’t been here before have we, the woman says. The man regards the environs and shakes his head. No, it was always a room at the end of every revision, he says.

Always a room with the man who wore thick glasses, who smiled wryly and who apologized for the convoluted temporality he had infused their lives with. They would always laugh at this. Oh yes, we did have trouble with the tenses; no wonder we were nauseous, they would tell the man with the thick glasses and the wry smile.

The woman makes a sound as she hears the creatures gather around them. We need to go, the man says and takes her hand and they rush deep into the bush. The creatures, not animals but something far more feral, follow, never too close but never too far as to disappear into the thick of the woods.

The man and the woman run deeper and deeper into the bush and the creatures stalk in lockstep. When they stop for a breath, they hear them circling: fuming and conspiring. When the night falls they find shelter under a low tree which hangs above them like a canopy. The man lights a fire with the matches he finds in his pocket. We are going to run out of these soon, he says. But the woman has tired from all the running and she curls up against the fire and goes quiet. The man is too restless to sleep. Also, someone has to keep the watch. He climbs up on a low branch and watches the fire splutter and crackle and listens to the sounds of the night. Where have we ended up, he wonders. Why is the sky starless? The night so full of dread? He shakes his pockets and wishes he had some cigarettes.

In the morning when the fire runs out, the creatures drive them out. Through the day and then into early evening, they run. Every night they find a different place to rest. In the hollow of a tree, in the dark of a cave or atop thick branches with fires burning underneath. In the day they eat the fruit of the forest or the sweet bark of the misshapen trees. Their hair grows unbound. Their nails jut out. Their clothes come undone. And they make angry, wild love. The deeper they go, the thicker the bush gets and the thicker the dread that surrounds them. The creatures always follow, keeping to the shadows. The forest is a harsh place, the man and woman’s skin breaks out into scabs and rashes and sometimes, they go days without talking to one another. On other days they can’t stop screaming at each other. They patch themselves up with leaves in the light of the night fires. Slowly but eventually the dread enters them, through the sight of their eyes, through the sounds of the night and everything they touch, feel and smell. They holler at the moon when it’s heavy and sometimes they communicate only in grunts. Their dreams are broken, atrophied. The dread ravages their bodies like a disease. Their lovemaking turns vicious. They grow more afraid of the elements. Incoherence subsumes their existence. And in moments when there is a bit of clarity, they question everything. Was their ever really a room or a revision, the woman asks. All of it feels like it was just planted in me. Like it was a story being told, not something that had happened. The man reflects on this. It felt true. Everything that was from before felt like it was of or related to the thing rather than the thing itself. Maybe there was nothing before this, maybe this is all there is, he says. Then he shakes his pocket and takes the remaining matches out. We just have two left. Can we then please go insane, she pleads, tears streaking her face. Aren’t we there already, he yells, look at us!

In the morning the woman is awoken by the fire. The man has been calling to her, shaking her but it’s the heat that wakes her up. We’ve to go, he says with his hands. They take each other’s hands and run wherever the fire drives then to. In the heat of the flames they hear the shrieks of the creatures and the crackling of their bones and the stink of their burning flesh. Did you do this, the woman grunts, did you set this fire? Tell me, the woman screams, did you burn it all down?

3.

Their world is labyrinthine: they are in an infinite circle cut into dark, wet, foul mud. The black mud walls rise a hundred feet around them. The woman rages as if she has raged from the beginning of time. Time began, of course, when they stepped out of the box. But the man is convinced that she’s not carrying. She’s diseased, insane but she’s not carrying. He surveys their universe: it’s a series of circles, he thinks, every circle is infinite and there’s no convergence, every one of them is the center and the ends.

 They have been walking for days or whatever days are supposed to be under a never cooling sun. They have covered themselves with mud so that they don’t burn. And they eat the mud so they could survive. Somedays they hear a noise that nearly melts their brains. They stuff their ears with mud to keep it out.

 They try climbing out but they slip every time, fall and lose consciousness. They get into fights and scratch and bite and bludgeon each other. Their spite grows as foul as their world.

And then the woman grunts stop. Maybe, she gesticulates, we should part ways. You go this way and I that. The man shakes his head. You are ill, he motions, and I can’t leave you like this. They lie down in the mud reduced by fatigue and the man turns to the woman. So what do we do, he asks. We dig, she points to the ground. To where? To wherever it may lead.

4.

It leads them to a city which is black and dead. It has streets paved with houses coated in centuries of grime. They drift like leaves looking for a place that still has windows and doors or atleast an unbroken floor. When they do and the woman goes inside and curls up in a warm corner to sleep, the man locks himself out and leaves.

At first he walks briskly and then he breaks into a run and then when he is far enough, he runs even quicker. It’s time. It’s the best for both of them. They are crazed, miserable and have no chance of survival. Atleast this way they don’t slow each other down.

Night turns to day. Then night. Then day again. The woman sleeps through it all. She dreams of the life growing in her, of colors in the sky and the sweet smells of the forest. She dreams to the ends of her finite memories until the pounding on the door shatters like splinters into her consciousness.

No! No! No! She shrieks through the door, you left me here to die! The man pounds on. He pleads. He begs. And when he hears her slide down against the door in exhaustion, he pounds the door until it breaks down and carries her inside.

I’ve walked mad circles through the city until I found my voice, he says when she comes to. I wanted to run away. Honest. But I was swayed. I was led. And I’ve been places. I’ve lived lives. I’ve feasted on rats. The woman gasps. Rats are what saved you woman, he says, his face bright and his eyes shiny. He laughs and stands up. Even dead cities have rats! You know what really saved me though? I know what this dread is, this madness. We are unmoored! We got no centers! The woman sits up. It’s true, he says, we’ve been diminished, we degenerated because we have no histories, no pasts, nothing to belong to and nothing to call our own. But this is how we came forth, she says. Yes, but it doesn’t have to be, he says. The only way to fight this – whatever this is – is to reject everything and recreate it all, the man says, and we start by first giving ourselves names.

 He christens himself P and her A. Just letters, she asks. Yes, so that we don’t forget. And then we make our own stories, he pauses and sits down again, it’s the only responsible thing to do: to make a leap of faith. Me, I was born into a big family, an ancient family, one of many brothers and I spent my youth unbridled: swimming, running and singing. And what’s my story? A asks. You come from a long line of beautiful, strong women, prodigious women. You love the smell of the first rain on a summer day. You love surprises. You are a mean cook and a wonderful dancer. A smiles through her hair and the mud and the scabs. When did I smile last, she wonders. Maybe when I was young and free-spirited?

 P continues. When the time was perfect we met on a beautiful evening, he says, I saw you in a garden, sitting by yourself, a thing of its own conception. We met and we fell in love and we ran off on an insane adventure and brought a life into this mad, mad place. He reaches out and places his hands on her swollen belly and she sighs and holds him closer. Later, in his arms, she is overcome with exhaustion and she cries and cries until they are tired as death and they lie down on the floor and curl up into each other.

5.

At night P is awoken by the sound of A’s voice. She is standing next to the wall and calling out to him. When he reaches her, she points at it: there is a cupboard built into the wall.

What if it goes nowhere, he says. And what if it’s a hell worse than all hells, she says and takes his hand. Believe it or not, she says, there is no place I would rather be. When they are ready, they breathe deep and step into the cupboard and close its doors. 

