From: Krithika Akkaraju<krithikaa@gmail.com>
Date: 08 November 2016 19:00
Subject: The Sandalwood Frame
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

She had been wrapped up in her favorite dream – of being on safari deep in the jungle, senses alert for the big cat. The scent of dried grass filled the air, while the slight nip in the air heralded the imminent sunset. The magical hour was drawing to an end and she impatiently clicked the camera on and off in anticipation of a sighting. Suddenly the hair at the back of her neck stood on end. She could smell fresh scat. There was a slight rustle in the bushes while deep from the jungle, a langoor barked out an alarm. Slowly, the bushes parted with a swish and she lifted the camera to her eyes. The whiteness almost blinded her. Instinctively, Kavya covered her eyes with her hands and sat up in alarm.

As her dream rapidly dissipated from her consciousness, Kavya struggled to make sense of the familiar silhouette blocking the bedroom window.

‘Sorry to wake you, dear, but I was just wondering if I should go ahead and make breakfast today?’ Kavya stole a quick look at the pink paisley wall clock (wedding gift) across her bed – six-bloody-thirty.

‘No, no mummy, of course not. I was just waking up anyway.’ There was something about what she was doing that reminded Kavya of that day in eight grade when she had been halfway through chemistry class and found everyone except her fishing two-page assignments out of their bags. She distinctly remembered her classmates’ busy movements and her own lack of them; the way her smile had at first faltered uncomprehendingly and then transformed into an embarrassed ‘oh’.

And now Kavya sat there in front of her mother in law, dohar pulled up to cover her braless-negligee-d breasts. The silhouette remained unmoved. Damn the backlight! thought Kavya, she couldn’t make out a single detail on her mother in laws face. The tick tock of the clock cut the silence like a chainsaw. A film of sweat broke out on Kavya’s upper lip and she licked it away surreptitiously.

The impasse broke when Kavya’s stomach let out an early morning squeal. Kavya inhaled sharply and let out a delicate cough to cover the embarrassing sound. Clearing her throat, she fiddled with a stray thread on the bedcover, hoping her mother in law would read the signs and make an incongruous exit. When five agonizing minutes passed, Kavya finally took matters into her own hands. She made a great ceremony of wrapping the dohar around her body. Smoothening the fabric carefully around her rear, she walked past the unmoving silhouette, head held high and into the bathroom. It was only when she had locked the bathroom door that she realized, with mounting sickness, that somewhere on their bed, entwined in a mass of bedcovers and pillows were Hiren’s bright blue jockstraps and her fuchsia thongs. When she came out of the bathroom ten minutes later, their bed was neatly made. Their underwear was neatly hung behind the bedroom door.

‘Just my bed, Veena, that’s all I want. Is it too much to ask for 5feet by 7feet of private space in my life? She can have the kitchen, the living room, the study, my cupboard space, but you know what, I draw the line at my bed. What happened this morning - it’s too bloody much.’ said Kavya, setting up the tripod.

‘Hey, look at it this way Kavya, at least your in laws didn’t tag along on your honeymoon. I was cooking dal, chawal and potato fry for mummyji and pappaji right across Switzerland. And washing dishes with Vim liquid after. I now gag each time I go to the detergent section.’

Kavya laughed and set up the camera. ‘Well, when you put it that way, Veens, I can see how I completely lucked out. At least I don’t have to wear a ghoonghat, at least I can still keep my goldfish, at least I can talk to my husband in their presence; at least I’m allowed to work... anything else? Sure, my two-month old marriage is a bloody cakewalk. Now can we get on with the shoot please? You do realize this is the only thing that keeps my sanity intact. Let’s have this conversation again when your mother in law starts hanging up your lacy pink undies!’

It was almost 8pm by the time Kavya got home. She could smell the aloo parathas all the way down to the basement. She impatiently jabbed the elevator button, excited at the prospect of having dinner laid out for her after a hard day’s work. ‘I’m having aloo parathas tonite, courtesy your mom. Can’t wait! See you 12ish? Don’t forget to kiss me awake xx’ she sent Hiren the SMS, and then dropping the phone into her bag, dug out the house keys.

Stepping in, she realized she was in the wrong house. An ornate sandalwood frame hung on the wall and tendrils of smoke were escaping from it. Gods big and small were housed inside this frame, while a thread of blinking red bulbs went on and off in disco delight. Just when she was about to turn back, she saw an apparition. Through the haze of frankincense and furiously ringing a temple bell, her mother in law appeared.

‘Oh hello beta, we didn’t’ see you come in! isn’t this great? Papaji and me went to the market today and thought you could use a pooja room. But given the limited space, this is the best we could do. And oh, there are some other surprises for you in your bedroom and in the kitchen as well. And please, you don’t have to thank us, you are like our daughter after all. Goodnight beta, all this work has exhausted us. See you in the morning.’

Aloo parathas long forgotten, Kavya walked zombie-like through their apartment that night. She began with the kitchen. Pearl pet boxes lined the walls. A stack of new steel plates with matching bowls and glasses sat neatly rinsed by the sink. The free wall clock that came with the pearl pet boxes hung by its newly drilled nail at the far end of the wall. When she stared at it, it seemed to stop just for a moment, as though afraid of what she would say, or do. And then, realizing she posed no threat, continued its mechanical ticking.

An off-white plastic table stood at the center of the living room with a white lace table cover. A matching set of four plastic chairs stood around it.

Unbelieving, yet daring to know more, Kavya entered her bedroom. With cold, damp hands, and holding her breath, she switched on the light. A warmth of familiarity surrounded her. It looked exactly the way she had left it that morning. Weak with relief, she let out the breath she had been holding. She switched on the fan and it whirred to life. A movement caught her attention. Her green silk stole was caught between the cupboard doors and was fluttering in the breeze. She walked up to the cupboard and opened it, in what she later remembered as slow motion.

Inside, rows of colorful plastic trays had been neatly stacked with her possessions. The blue tray contained lacy panties, the red tray – boring everyday ones, the white tray had socks and belts, while the green had her stash of tampons. Her camera lenses were stashed behind her colorful lineup of wedding saris, in the darkest reaches of her cupboard - so far back that she thought, for a moment, they had been discarded. Hiren’s side of the cupboard was similarly arranged. She only remembered that Hiren’s blue tray contained the condoms. She had even mumbled it to him in her sleep around 3am.

That night, she once again dreamt of being in a vehicle. Only, this time, it was a rickety minivan, hurtling over a bumpy road. Her head was bent low, the weight of her ghoonghat forcing her to stoop almost onto Hiren’s sandaled feet. A camera bag lay at her feet, gathering dust and getting kicked around from passenger to passenger. From her left, an arm appeared. It was holding a pearl pet box, stuffed with aloo parathas.

She woke up, startled; a film of sweat on her upper lip. But much, much before her mother in law could silhouette her morning light, she tossed the covers aside and got out of bed.

--------

That evening, when Kavya’s mother in law turned the key of the apartment door, she thought she had walked into the wrong house. On the living room wall, the one you could see as soon as you entered, was a massive photograph. A banjaran, her back tanned and bare in all its glory was at the center of the frame. Her face was turned towards the camera and she was laughing, her teeth white and her spirit free. It was captioned: ‘The gypsy November 2009’. In the kitchen, a photograph of a couple rolling dough together, the flour forming a happy cloud around them, their hands and bodies entwined seductively. ‘Courtship, May 2010’. Next to the sandalwood frame hung a photograph of prayer wheels; an old monk rolling them as he walked by: ‘Finding faith’ Ladakh, August 2011’.

Kavya had been careful to select each of her photographs– each of them, shot by her, capturing little sparks of her personality that she feared she was losing. In her in laws bedroom, she hung a photograph of an old cupboard with chains around its handles, the lock secure and seemingly unbreakable. She left it uncaptioned.

The next morning, as the clock struck six thirty, Kavya woke up to silence. Curious, she went out to investigate. The house was empty, the plastic tables, chairs and pearl pet bottles were gone. The sandalwood frame now stood around her photograph of the banjaran. The smell of incense, though, still hung in the air.

Hiren came up from behind and put his arms on her shoulders. ‘Kavya Sethi, You’re quite the photographer aren’t you?’

Kavya turned around and looked him in the eye. He was grinning.

‘You know what, sweetheart, I guess I really am.’

She walked back to the bedroom with Hiren, her breasts gloriously braless in her negligee. 

