From: Anirban Nanda<anirban.igp@gmail.com>
Date: 07 November 2016 19:00
Subject: City Life
To: outofprintmagazine@gmail.com

Visualise:

A bus. Of white colour, with two sky-blue stripes just below the roof and another two just above the wheels. On the white surface under the windows, ‘Barasat-B.Garden’ is written in red, in Bengali. The road on which it is moving is not entirely smooth, and not without bumps. Therefore, while moving, it makes a certain creaking, drumming noise that is so common among the buses that are old in India, and especially in our case, in Kolkata. A hot day. Sun is going quite strong. Right now, the bus is slowly coming to a halt, under an over-bridge, at a signal. The bridge takes the bus in its shade. ‘Exide, get down, Exide,’ the conductor energetically shouts, thumping the door of the bus now and again, urging the passengers who want to get down at the bus-stop, get down. To help, he adds, ‘Rabindra Sadan, Exide, get down,’ for Rabindra Sadan is a metro station and is near. The row of half-open windowpanes are trembling with the engine, a rhythmic thrumming as the bus waits for the signal to turn green, and from those half-open windows, faces can be seen – sweaty, oily and furrowed – peeking, staring, looking; some irritatedly, some absently. The faces are furrowed even though the bridge has shaded the sun. Among those faces, a young man is gazing outside. His view is blocked by the bridge and the buildings beside the road. His gaze is nor peaceful, neither solemn. Not exactly worried either. It can be described as a superposition of being surprised and disappointed.

That young man is me and for a while, let me look at myself afar.

He is the first from his village to get a job and come to the city. Before him, his forefathers relied on farming to fill their bellies. That was the only purpose they had in their lives. To not remain hungry. But, he, the best student the village had ever produced, got a job and decided to leave the village. A rational decision. A decision to take the life a step forward. So, this he, who is supposed to be excited to be in his dreamland, looks surprised and disappointed.

This is the point which makes this story interesting. I’d like to introduce myself with a name, but I choose not to. Because by not revealing my name, I leave you a chance to call me by any name, anything you want. Quite a freedom, I’d say.

I look outside. I look at the faces waiting in buses and private cars. I look sideways as the bus I’m in is too full to look ahead. My neck pains as I look sideways. But I keep looking sideways anyway.

I should look ahead. Forward. Where to? I’ll reach the office in an hour and spend the next eight hours doing something. Doing my job if you want to call it a job. Sometimes, I even forget what job I’m appointed for.

But I do get my salary on time. A template message in my phone at the first day of every month. I get my salary. I send half of it to my family and spend the rest on food and rents. The foods I get are yellow and watery. Note: ‘rents’ is a plural.

I started with a commanding ‘visualize’ and now I can’t even visualize the dinner I had last night.

See: I, a no one in a big city, am sitting in a bus. I have to go to office. This hour is called the office hour. Everyone goes to office now. Everyone will enter a building and carry his job on. Too many people want to do their duties. And hence, while we move, we take turns. We wait at a signal to let others move and reach to places to do their jobs. A perfectly normal thing to do when you live in a city. You wait everywhere for your turn. You even have people appointed to look over this waiting-for-turns thing. A cooperative system to help you live and let live.

I am good at making lists. I use them as bullet points in PPTs. My superiors like me for this.

I see:

 - A lot of people are crammed in a small place. - They go to work every day and the act of going is a big deal. - They travel from faraway places to work. - They don’t know what they are working on. - They are waiting on road in moveable metallic boxes on a hot day. - A rectangular plastic case on everyone’s hand. It promises to remove distance created by them in the first place. - It acts as a toy to keep them busy. Many are listening to music in earphones. A good way to block the sounds of horns and people. Music with high beats and a lot of shouting. Music to block the noise outside.

A huge muscular naked man is standing in a poster wearing only underwear. His body has no hair. It is tinted with blue. What you wear under makes you cool: the poster says. A lot of pain is taken to design the underwear.

Another poster just beside him. A sari-clad housewife is recommending a spice made by a particular company to make the best fish curry. It’ll taste like it is made by your mom; she claims. Motherhood sealed, packed and advertised.

Yet another smaller poster claiming to make one look attractive, that is, fairer within seven days. A big content face gleaming like a lamp beside it. The face sits horizontally on the same line with the naked man’s genitals, clearly discernible from the giant poster.

The bus is vibrating because the engine is old. It is making everyone vibrate inside it. I am a ringing, vibrating phone and there is no one to pick up the call.

I feel like vomiting. My vomit too would look yellowish and watery.

I have been drawing an arbitrary pattern with my sweaty fingers on the windowpane. It looks like:

 A meaningless thing: this picture.

Sometimes I wonder why people live in a place like this if it is so thick with lives. Maybe that is a reason – to be among the thickness of lives.

I read news, or rather, news reads itself to me via this little plastic device I have in my pocket. I read about: unemployment, global warming, climate change, a new disease, some rapes, some murders, a new scam, an impending world war. I like the variety. But whenever I think about the news, I feel a strange suffocation inside my throat. Questions come in my mind. The whys. The hows. And often I conclude all these are happening because there are way too many people living on this planet. For last few weeks, I have been thinking horrible things. At times, I cringe after realizing what I was thinking. What it would be like if a large dinosaur suddenly arrives and squashes all these people by its big feet? So little an effort and such devastating possibilities.

I have a tooth infection at the left side of my gum. When I close my jaws tight, soothing pain oozes out of it. Sometimes there is a little blood. I enjoy the metallic taste for a while. But only for a while. Afterwards, I wash my mouth. When I am bored, I press that tooth hard with hand. Once the pain is too much, I leave it and smell my fingers. An awful stink. Inside of a body always stinks.

My body has a switch. I’d turn it on and a controlled pain would take my mind off from everything. Like walking on a tightrope, or handling a venomous snake. I am not planning to remove this switch. It gives me a certain something where I can concentrate fully.

A generic statement: A life’s only aim is to use up all its potential till it dies.

This road has two lanes. Then, why are all the cars in both lanes moving in same direction?

The person sitting beside me is playing Tetris. I didn’t play it when I was a child. I played football.

I think Tetris is a philosophical game. You have to fit random shapes in your messed up design. Upon fitting perfectly, you are rewarded. Some of the mess gets cleared.

An intersex is tapping on the cars’ windows for money. What pronoun should I use here? He or she? ‘It’ is used for non-living things.

Why they, the hijras, clap their hands like that? Do they like doing it? What is so special about it?

I see a person on the other lane allows his frothy spit to dangle for a moment and then fall on the road like a slimy toad. Seeing him, I spit in the same way. The spit lies like a lynched frog.

The signal is being red for too long. The cars start honking. An unwritten rule: if you are impatient, you honk. I crane my neck out of the window to look what is the matter. A long line of vehicles standing still. Far away, tiny buses and cars are speeding past from left to right. On the other side, another long line of cars just like this one. As if a vast mirror is set at the midline. Come to think of it, this whole city is full of mirrors.

I think two thoughts: 1. If there was no traffic, it’d take twenty minutes to reach my office from my home. 2. Tomorrow, I’ll wait like this, at this same signal. I repeat these two thoughts again and again. I know it is angering me, but I like this process of coming over with anger.

‘This fucking jam!’ I shout finally and jump up from my seat. I start pushing people deliberately. In return, they start pushing me. I am almost enjoying this.

They push me out of the bus. I am laughing and voicing the most offensive words I can come up with.

Soon, I am tired of it. I look in front and see the red point gleaming afar. It turns green. The engines are gearing up from all sides. Noises – high, shrill and loud – flood my ears. I am in the middle of the road of roaring mechanical beasts. Smoke of burning petrol goes in my nostrils. I breathe a deep breath. I close my eyes and tighten my jaws. The pain fills my head. The noises recede slowly.

Blindly but decidedly, I start walking forward. 

