Three thousand five hundred cars were sold in Ahmedabad on Dussehra. The figure is close to the number of deliveries made last year, estimate local dealers. Many dealers say they're struggling to match the sales of last year because of an overall slowdown in the economy and rising prices of fuel.
An official at a Maruti Suzuki dealer said close to 200 units are being delivered on Dussehra, about 15-20 per cent lower than the previous year. According to estimates close to 1,700 cars of the market leader have being delivered on the festive occasion. Market watchers said that the company has increased dealers dividing the prospective buyers.
"The footfall is nowhere compared to last year," said an employee at a Nexa showroom, which delivered close to 40 units against 70 odd units in 2017.
Customers book vehicles in advance to get them on Dussehra, considered auspicious for buying property.
Dealers of Tata Motors, Mahindra and Honda also shared the same story. Only a dealer of Hyundai Motors said foot-falls and deliveries have increased. 'In October, we expect sales of 475 units compared to 300 last year. We are not including new Santro, which will be available in the showrooms from October 23. This Dussehra we delivered 125 units," said the official. According to his estimates, close to 650 Hyundai cars are being delivered on Dussehra.
"Sales are more or less the same as last year. The rush of customers is not as per our expectation. We had anticipated that the shortfall in sales from April to August would be compensated during festive season. But it seems unlikely," said Harshal Desai, assistant director at Landmark Group which sells Honda cars in the city. He delivered over 200 units on Dussehra.
An official at a Tata Motors dealer said Dussehra sales have dropped by 15-20 per cent as compared to 2017. "Liquidity is scarce in market and affecting sales," he said.
Tightening of lending norms by banks seems to have also affected consumer behaviour, remarked Desai.
Meanwhile, gold sales remained subdued in the city and jewellers expect a pick-up on Dhanteras and Pushya Nakshatra. "Sales are lower by about 50 per cent. We expect it to pick up ahead of Diwali," said Manoj Soni, director of AB Jewels.
He said that diversifying consumer choices have limited people's budget for the yellow metal. Moreover, sales of biscuits and coins have dropped, an indication that it is less preferred as an investment option.
The scenario is similar in the two-wheeler segment. Rupesh Jantrania, director of Oceanic TVS said that sales of two-wheelers were going strong in the initial months of the fiscal. However, as Dussehra approached, the demand seems to fade. " Perhaps, the spending behaviour has shifted from discretionary to need-based. Inquiries this year are fewer compared to last year," said Jantrania.
Close to 1,700 cars have been delivered during the festive season

