The Haryana Roadways employees went on a two-day strike Tuesday to protest the state government's decision to introduce 700 private buses in the state.
Despite the Essential Services Maintenance Act (ESMA) being in force the roadways workers went on strike and staged sit-ins at several depots across the state, including in Rohtak, Bhiwani, Sirsa and Chandigarh.
The Essential Services Maintenance Act prohibits strikes by employees in an essential service.
Police personnel were deployed at several bus stands to prevent any untoward incident and buses plied with police escort at some roadways depots.
The agitating employees said they would not allow the government to launch 700 private buses in the state as it would lead to privatisation of the transport department.
"We want the Haryana government to withdraw its decision of introducing private buses in the state," a union leader said Tuesday.
They said the government should instead increase the number of buses under the roadways department.
There are about 19,000 employees in Haryana Roadways, which has a fleet of 4,100 buses in which nearly 12 lakh passengers travel daily.
The government would effectively implement the ESMA, a senior official said.
The Punjab and Haryana High Court Monday directed the Haryana government to ensure strict implementation of the ESMA during two-day strike called by the state's Roadways Employees Union.
In August also, the employees had gone on a day-long strike to protest the government's decision to introduce 700 private buses in the state. 
Meanwhile, bringing relief to Delhi people, the Delhi Metro's Pink line will be opened by Diwali, according to various media reports. Pink line for Shiv Vihar-Trilokpuri Metro was scheduled to be opened in August as per a previous plan bu tthen the deadline got extended. 
Pink Line Metro will ease connectivity between North East Delhi and South Delhi by connecting Shiv Vihar and Lajpat Nagar. The Shiv Vihar-Trilokpuri section will have 15 stations that will include Shiv Vihar, Johri Enclave, Gokulpuri, Maujpur, Jaffrabad, Welcome, East Azad Nagar, Krishna Nagar, Karkardooma Court, Karkardooma, Anand Vihar, IP Extension, Vinod Nagar, Vinod Nagar East, Trilokpuri. This part of Pink Line will also provide three interchange stations at Welcome, Karkardooma Court and Anand Vihar.
