Much before the ‘start-up’ lexicon entered boardroom discourses, a silent revolution was brewing in many parts of India. Going against the odds unleashed by licence and inspector Raj, a handful of visionaries were directing all their energies into their dreams, their own start-ups. They are now formidable entrepreneurs. Because they dared to dream.   
Celebrating the success of home-grown innovative businesses, India’s leading Hindi business channel, Zee Business, in collaboration with SAP India Pvt Ltd, is acknowledging the achievements of top entrepreneurs across seven cities in the country in Dare to Dream Awards. 
The series kickstarted on October 15 with the Delhi edition where Dr Arun Kumar Panda, Secretary, Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises gave away 18 awards to shining stars of India’s entrepreneurial ecosystem. “This is a great recognition of our country’s entrepreneurial spirit. The winners here will serve as role models for many who seek to make a name for themselves,” Dr Panda said, while highlighting government’s robust policies.
Applauding the winners, Zee Business Managing Editor Anil Singhvi said: “The real dreams aren’t those that you envision with your eyes closed but the ones you envision with your eyes open.”
‘Business Person of the Year’ Ramesh Agarwal, Chairman of Agarwal Packers Group, said: “This could be a platform for the entrepreneurs to get appreciated for what they have done. It would serve as a much-needed morale booster especially for the upcoming entrepreneurs and the younger generations.”  In between awards, the doyens of entrepreneurship also shared their wisdom with the audience. In an experience sharing session moderated by Sajith Simon, Head - General Business, Indian Metros, Bangladesh & Sri Lanka at SAP India Pvt. Ltd., “Inspirational Leader” K S Rathee, Chairman of ASK Automotive Pvt. Ltd, said: “We had an idea, we had a vision and we were dedicated. I always thought from the very beginning that whether we make a needle or whether we make tyres, we should be number one in the country in what we do!” 
Dinesh Agarwal, the founder of IndiaMart, was also conferred with the honour of Inspirational Leader along with K S Rathee. 
Women as the mainstays of business was also recognised at the event. Deepshikha Khaitan, Non-Executive Vice Chairperson, Cera Sanitaryware Limited, bagged the Women Entrepreneur of the Year Award. Three young business leaders - Ishan Khaitan of Sunil Healthcare Limited, Varun Gupta of Kent RO Systems and Pankaj Poddar of Cosmo Films Limited – were also felicitated at the event. 

