Enjoy that new book in the bath with comfort knowing that, if you drop the new Kindle Paperwhite in the water, you can pick it back up and continue right where you left off. No panicking necessary.
Amazon announced the new Kindle Paperwhite, the new e-reader that's thinner and lighter than ever with the twice the storage space. The most exciting innovation, though, is that the device is completely waterproof for up to two hours in as deep as two meters of freshwater. Plus, it can withstand those accidental drops in non-freshwater bodies like the ocean or pool. Now, you can kick back with a good book in some of the most relaxing places without worry, you could even strap on some goggles and read underwater if you want.
This waterproofing of the device, though doubtlessly the most exciting and long-awaited for, is not the only handy innovation the reader brings to the table. The Paperwhite gained a number of other developments that will bring your digital book to the next level.
The Kindle Paperwhite is the most popular Kindle device, and this all-new version is now thinner at just 8.18mm thick and lighter than previous models at 182g. In fact, this particular Kindle is, "less than half the weight of many paperback books" but reads almost exactly the same with the high resolution 300 ppi display that brings crisp, glare-free text.
You can get the Paperwhite in one (or both) of two versions: the 8 GB model, which already holds twice the amount of titles as the previous generation, or the 32 GB model which is a good option if you're a fan of content that requires large files like audiobooks, comics, or magazines. With Audible support built-in to the device and direct access to the Audible store, you can listen to whichever titles you want just by connecting the Paperwhite to headphones or speakers via Bluetooth.
The 8 GB Kindle Paperwhite is $129.99 and the 32 GB model starts at $159.99 or can be upgraded to have free cellular connectivity for $249.99. All versions are available for pre-order in the US and will be released November 7.
