YouTube has updated its policy for Partner Program, making it difficult to post duplicate content without consequences. If you are a YouTube Partner and posting someone else's work or duplicate content, your channel will be removed. In its blog, YouTube explains that it is boosting its efforts at protecting the creator community from abuse. All the YouTube Partner Program participants will be scrutinized rigorously on a regular basis to ensure they meet the guidelines.
YouTube says that 'duplicative content' not only refers to copyright. If you are posting content from multiple sources or repurpose existing content, you may still be eligible for the program as long as you are  contributing to the value of the content in some way, such as editing, original commenting, narrative, and so on. 
Content found automatically generated, pulled from third-party sources, uploaded multiple times, or infringing the copyright tools will be removed under 'duplicative content'. Channels will have to reapply for the program in 30 days following review. 
Recently, a music consumer report by the industry's global body IFPI published found that 86 percent of us listen to music through on-demand streaming. And nearly half that time, 47 percent is spent on YouTube. Video as a whole accounted for 52 percent of the time we spent streaming music, posing challenges to such subscription services as Spotify and SoundCloud.
But while Spotify's estimated annual revenue per user was $20 (17.5 euros), YouTube's was less than a dollar. The London-based IFPI issued a broader overview in April that found digital sales for the first time making up the majority of global revenues thanks to streaming. The report published on Tuesday looked into where and when we listen to music.
It found that three in four people globally use smartphones, with the rate among 16 to 24 year olds reaching 94 percent. The highest levels were recorded in India, where 96 percent of consumers used smartphones for music, including 99 percent of young adults. But music does not end when we put away our phones, with 86 percent globally also listening to radio.
With inputs from ANI
