Apple's latest iteration of its iPhone and iPad software is running on more than half of the total devices. According to the company's latest numbers, iOS 12 is running on 52 percent devices which were introduced in the last four years. iOS 12, which released less than a month ago on September 17, shares a major chunk of the userbase, indicating a swift adoption among iOS device owners. iOS11, on the other hand, runs on 40 percent of iOS devices, while the previous versions calculate to just 7 percent of all devices.
If one looks at the all iOS devices, then 50 percent of them are on the newest iOS 12, and 39 percent on the iOS 11 version, while the rest are on previous versions of the software. With the newest iOS 12, Apple has aimed at improving performance and stability, leading to more users actually willing to update. 
Apple's polished iPhone line-up comes with tools to help users dial back their smartphone obsessions, amid growing concerns over "addiction" and harmful effects on children. An iOS 12 mobile operating system that will power new iPhones unveiled on Wednesday, and be pushed out as an update to prior models, has new features to reduce how much they distract people from the real world.
Apple senior vice president of software engineering Craig Federighi said of iOS 12 at a developers conference earlier this year the new system offers "detailed information and tools" to help users and parents keep tabs on device use.
A new "Screen Time" tool generates activity reports showing how often people pick up their iPhones or iPads, how long they spend in apps or at websites, and numbers of notifications received.
Users will be able to set limits on time spent in apps. Parents will be able to get activity reports from their children's iPhones or iPads, and impose time limits on apps from games and news to social media and messaging.
The operating system will also allow people to designate "down time" when iPhones or iPads can't be used -- perhaps a child's bedtime or a grown-up's meditation hour. Activist investor Jana Partners and the California State Teachers' Retirement System (CalSTRS), which both have stakes in Apple, early this year called on the company to give parents more tools to ensure children are using its devices in ways that aren't hurting them.
With inputs from ANI
