About two decades ago, I joined the Centre for Science and Environment, which publishes the Down To Earth magazine, and started my journey as an environmental journalist. The magazine used to regularly explore and report stories on the linkages between environment and human health, including diseases such as cancer. That time most environmental journalists were labelled as alarmists and lacking in scientific understanding, who, it was alleged, overreacted to linkages between environmental factors and cancer.
But, the tide finally seems to be turning. Recently, on May 26-27, the ‘First Conference on Environmental and Occupational Determinants of Cancer’ was held at AIIMS, New Delhi, in partnership with the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change. The conference, which was attended by hundreds of medical doctors, health practitioners, bureaucrats, civil society groups and media representatives from across the country, was the first formal conference where both the medical  community and the government agencies officially acknowledged and discussed the impacts environmental factors have on various cancers.
Simply put, the incidence of cancer is linked to the environment around us. And, the environment means our surroundings — the air we breathe, the water we drink, the food we eat, the chemicals we spray, the cars we drive, the cosmetics we apply, and much more. While inaugurating the conference, Dr GK Rath, chief of Dr BR Ambedkar Institute Rotary Cancer Hospital at AIIMS, minced no words in saying that about 5-10 per cent cancers are due to genetic factors. The rest are practically caused due to environmental factors such as pollution, diet, lifestyle, tobacco, etc., and, these environmental factors are preventable.
An international study, published in multidisciplinary scientific journal Nature, had also recently reported that at least 70-90 per cent of the cancers are due to external risk factors. This is important as it means that by creating a healthy environment, and making lifestyle and dietary changes, a large number of cancer cases could be prevented.
As against the cancer incidence of 439.2 per 1,00,000 per year in the US, the cancer incidence in India ranges from 40 per 1,00,000 (Barshi, Maharashtra) to 272 per 1,00,000 per year (Aizwal, Mizoram). Every year, 14.5 lakh new patients get added to the list of cancer patients in the country, of which only half get treated. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), approximately 70 per cent of deaths from cancer occur in low-and middle-income countries. And, these countries, including India, will face the highest increase in cancer rates “unless the exposure to risk factors is reduced”.
The WHO’s International Agency for Research in cancer has classified agents based on their carcinogenicity to human beings. Group 1 contains 120 agents that are known carcinogens to humans. Group 2A and 2B have 82 and 299 agents “probably carcinogenic to humans” and “possibly carcinogenic to humans”, respectively. In spite of enough scientific evidence, we have failed to safeguard human heath from these environmental factors that cause cancer.
For instance, diesel engine exhaust is classified as Group 1 agent. It is no secret that Indian cities are fast turning into gas chambers due to high air pollution, which accounted for 28 per cent of the 6.5 million air pollution-related deaths worldwide in 2015. It is claimed that air pollution kills 30,000 people ever year in Delhi alone. However, we are yet to act on air pollution with the seriousness that this humongous problem urgently demands.
Arsenic, a heavy metal, is classified under Group 1. About 239 million people across 153 districts in 21 states of the country drink water that contains unacceptably high levels of arsenic. Similarly, many pesticides such as monocrotophos, triazophos and phosphamidon, banned in several other countries, are still being used in India. And, these toxins enter our bodies through food chain and play havoc with our health. Asbestos is also classified as a carcinogen to humans. Whereas mining of asbestos is banned in India, its use in roofing sheets, insulation and brake linings continues unabated.
During the recent conference, Dr Harit Chaturvedi, chairperson, cancer care, director and chief consultant, Max Super Speciality Hospital, in Delhi, warned that obesity and lifestyle are going to be the ‘new tobacco’, meaning, so far maximum cancers in the country were linked to tobacco, but in the future, these may be linked with obesity and lifestyle. But, the government has not put in place policies that regulate consumption of high fat, sugar, salt (HFSS) foods. A recent study found that increased consumption of junk food has resulted in an increase in percentage of overweight and obese school students from 9.7 per cent to 13.9 per cent in the country, between 2001 and 2010.
Whereas a section of medical practitioners and government officials claim that cancer can be prevented by taking action at an individual level, such as eat healthy and exercise daily, it is clear that the majority of the citizens in the country have very little or no control over the polluted air they breathe and the contaminated food and water they consume. No wonder, protests against environmental pollution are rising across the country, and often turning violent. The Indian government must take on a pro-active role and safeguard the health of its citizens by following precautionary principles. It must strictly implement the existing rules and bring in stringent regulations to protect the environment because the writing on the wall is quite clear.
The author is a senior journalist. Views are personal.
