The Supreme Court sought to know what the Centre and the state governments planned to do with a corpus of Rs. One lakh crore that was collected under orders it passed in environmental matters.
A bench of Justices Madan B Lokur and Deepak Gupta sought to know how this money would be utilised while making it clear that the Executive could not spend it on construction of roads, colleges, etc since it is specifically meant for environment-related purposes.
The money was collected under various orders passed by the Supreme Court like compensatory afforestation fund, funds for wood-based industries, environment cess and those collected in illegal mining cases.
"On a rough estimate given by learned amicus curiae, it appears that there is an amount of up to Rs 1,00,000 crore that is lying with the Government of India and the States and Union Territories under various Heads consequent to orders passed by this Court from time to time," the bench noted.
The court then directed the Secretary in the Environment Ministry to make an exhaustive compilation of all the funds as on March 31, 2018.
The Environment Ministry was further directed by the bench to inform them how the amount of up to Rs 1,00,000 crore is intended to be utilised and "areas where it should not be utilised".
"Considering the huge amount involved, we expect the Secretary to take up the matter very seriously and with due sincerity," said the bench in its order on April 10.
The bench then pulled up Odisha and Meghalaya for their lapses and summoned the state secretaries on May 9, to explain them.
The Odisha government had collected the money through a court-mandated Special Purpose Vehicle for Scheduled Area Development of Lanjigarh Project arising out of mining matters.
"...for construction of roads, renovation of colleges, etc. These works are a part of the job of the State Government and the money collected which was expected to be used for the benefit of the people cannot be used for these purposes," maintained the bench.
The court then noted that Meghalaya had very casually drafted the affidavit suggesting that the money was simply kept in a bank account instead of using it for welfare.
Considering that the amount is Rs 1 lakh crore, the apex court said it expects the secretary of environment ministry to take up the matter very “seriously and with due sincerity”
