Beginning next year, patients can expect hassle-free treatments at civic hospitals as the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) plans to implement the Hospital Information Management System (HIMS) from January 2018.
The online system will first be rolled out at Nair Hospital, after which it will be implemented at other hospitals.
"We had initially planned to start it in dispensaries as a pilot project. But now we have decided to start it in hospitals," said Vijay Singhal, additional municipal commissioner, BMC (eastern suburbs), incharge of IT Reforms.
From getting an appointment at a municipal hospital to availing for free of cost medicines, the system promises to make such facilities available to patients at the click of a button. The HIMS will also integrate all departments of a hospital, bringing them on one platform, enabling them to check each other's status. At present, patients have to wait 15 days to a month on an average to get an appointment for an MRI test. HIMS will also help doctors to check the status of their patient's report immediately.
"The HIMS provides a secure environment for transactions across a hospital's departments. The system can also be used by physicians and nurses to remotely access a patient's medical records," said a senior official from BMC's IT department who is closely working on the project. He added that the BMC has received about 500 suggestions from doctors and the system will be customised accordingly. "We have conducted training sessions with hospital staff to get them acquainted with it. The new system will be implemented phase-wise," said the official, and added that major hospitals will be covered first and gradually all civic dispensaries will be connected to it as well.
There have been apprehensions about the system among doctors as its failure could cost a patient their life, but the civic administration is confident of the system making treatments at civic hospitals hassle-free.
Under the new system, doctors can only prescribe medicines that are available with the hospital. "We will keep a check on medicines being prescribed through the system," said a senior official from the BMC's general administration, and added, "The HIMS will also end the scope for corruption, making everyone involved more responsible."

