Doctors strikes in government hospitals have become so regular and common that patients have started to feel that there is no way out of the situation. In the recent strike at the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), where over 1,500 resident doctors kept the Out-patient department shut for nearly 48 hours, several patients were getting disappointed and turning away for other options.
The strike started after a senior resident doctor on duty was slapped by a senior faculty member for not being ready with a patient's documents. This angered the doctors, who demanded suspension of the faculty doctor and a better work environment.
Among this chaos, over 350 surgeries were cancelled and the treatment of the in-patients was also affected by this chaos.
Such strikes to demand better work environment are becoming quite common in many of the government hospitals in Delhi/NCR, severely disrupting the patient care and condemn for the medical fraternity.
"AIIMS strike unacceptable and a clear misuse of union power. Individual incidents do not mean making hundreds of patients suffer. A sad day indeed" tweeted Sujatha Rao, former Union Secretary of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
"In 2018 itself, AIIMS has seen several small and big strikes which led to the closing of the OPD every time. This is not how a medical institution should work. While the demands are understandable, they should not be at the cost of patient care," said a senior doctor.
A 60-year-old patient was seen returning after waiting for an entire day with severe pain in her stomach. The patient, Pushpa, said that she did not understand what has led the doctors to be unable to see patients lying there in pain. This breaks her trust in the entire doctor-patient relationship as it seems to her that they do not care at all.
1,500 Resident doctors kept the Out-patient department shut for nearly 48 hours
350 Surgeries were cancelled and the treatment of the in-patients was also affected
After whatever happened at AIIMS, it is clear that just because of a few people most of the patients were left to struggle. Several surgeries were left unattended, leaving patients in pain. Emergency cases were forced to wait till the strike ended.—Drashti Agnihotri
Being a medical student, I can understand what the doctors would have gone through, but none of their problems can overshadow what patients had to go through during the strike. Even if you avoid patients with prior appointments, you can't let the patients in an emergency suffer.—Awantika Mishra
My relatives had come to get a checkup done, but as they reached the doctor's cabin, people there told them to come after the strike was over. It was only after talking to other patients that my relatives got to know about the strike and the reason behind it.—Sakshi Sharma
Just because one doctor was slapped, the entire Delhi-NCR was left to suffer. And why only Delhi-NCR, patients from around north India visit this hospital. Patients were left waiting for the strike to end to receive medical treatment.—Wazir Kaur
It was only after some people in the locality came back from AIIMS without any treatment that we came to know about the strike. However, knowing the reason for the strike, it is clear that doctors need to learn better in order to register their protest and demand actions.—DB Dutta
Maybe the doctors found the cause to be big enough to protest, but it can never be justified when you compare it to the sufferings that patients had to go through. Patients in accident cases were left to deal with open wounds and a lot of pain.—Shalini Chawla
We couldn't get a solution by agitations during lunch hours or mobile torch march that wouldn't hamper patient care. I am not underestimating the power of agitations over the strike, but somehow it couldn't be done. We requested the director to keep Monday as a working day so that surgeries which had been cancelled due to the strike on Friday can be done. We, residents, feel sorry for whatever happened and want to compensate in every possible way.Dr Vijay Gurjar, Senior Resident and former RDA President, AIIMS.
