Pollution norms continue to haunt chemical industries in Gujarat. Industry players said that despite drastically reducing the intensity of the pollutants, they are not allowed to expand capacities. They also say that over past decade advancement in technology has made it possible to produce more at same effluent load.
They also demanded that pollution watch-dogs should restrict themselves to compliance of effluent norms and should refrain from dictating the quantum of production.
Industrial clusters of Vatva and Naroda in Ahmedabad were classified as critically polluted by central Ministry of Environment and Forest in 2009, putting a cap on further investments in the clusters. The cap was lifted two years ago.
Still industry players complain that they are unable to expand their capacities or new investments pouring into the clusters. They claim that while units in Gujarat are forefront in abiding to the pollution norms, they are deprived of making new investments.
'We have reduced the emission norms from abot 5,000 ppm to about 500 ppm. In fact we have reached at 450 ppm, which is the lowest in entire country.
Inspite of this, industries in Vatva are unable to expand," said Shanker Patel, chairman of Vatva Green, which operates the Common Effluent Treatment Plant (CETP) for chemical and allied industries in and around Vatva Industrial Estate.
Industrial clusters of Naroda, Vatva, Odhav and Narol have about 1,100 units and their proposed investment is estimated at over Rs10,000 crore.
Patel said that unlike industrial units in Gujarat, their counterparts in other states have not been able to significantly reduce pollution. However, they are able to expand as their pressure groups are not so vigilant as in Gujarat.
"We told the central MoEF, that it is their duty to monitor effluent norms and not rely on pressure groups," he said. Shailesh Patwari, chairman of Naroda Enviro Projects Ltd (NEPL), a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) by industrial units in Naroda Industrial Estate to treat the effluents said that after bringing down the pollutant content significantly in past decade, it is very difficult to improve further. It is also time consuming. "We have suggested the authorities to be flexible and not arm twist by threats of closure," said Patwari.
