The proposed environment sensors, to be a component of ‘smart corridor’ at the Dravyavati riverfront, will rely record of the city environment. Advanced electronic sensors at 10 locations shall relay the live status of parameters including, temperature, humidity,  ambient light, sound, pressure, carbon monoxide, sulphur-dioxide, nitrogen-dioxide, PM 2.5 and PM 10.
“The environment sensors shall enable the citizens and administrators to understand the impact of their endeavours and help the city take remedial action where ever required,” said an officer at Jaipur Development Authority. These sensors will be connected to an integrated control system, where the real-time data will be stored and made accessible to various departments for analysis. An intelligent analytical software is also sought by JDA to make the data more useful for various stakeholders.
The smart corridor is proposed will be 30km long along the 47km riverfront. Placed at a regular distance, these sensors shall thus provide crucial data regarding the environment of major parts of the city. However, the corridor, proposed separately from the riverfront’s initial project report, shall be constructed through a separate contract. 
The JDA, previously attempted engaging the consultant firm developing the riverfront, has now floated bids inviting tender for the ‘smart corridor’ on operation and maintenance basis. It has been estimated to cost nearly Rs 45 crore and will be developed in 4 months. 
Along with the environment sensing, the ‘smart corridor’ shall also include other services such as WiFi spots for those visitors at the riverfront, digital signage, smart waste management system, interactive kiosks, bike sharing and other IT-based services to provide the riverfront best of natural beauty and information technology services. 
The contractor is expected to develop nearly 20 such hotspots and may also include provisions to monetize the services. tract. The JDA, prhas now floated bids inviting tender for the ‘smart corridor’ on operation and maintenance basis. It has been estimated to cost nearly Rs 45 crore. 
