It was not just her on-screen presence through which the versatile actor connected with her audience. Off screen, Sridevi was special to many special children. As news of the actress' demise spread like wildfire, hundreds of her fans gathered outside her Green Acres residence in Lokhandwala, Andheri.
Beyond the film industry, Sridevi also actively worked with several NGOs to help special children. Children with physical and learning disabilities waited for hours to get a glimpse of her mortal remains.
Samya Handa,13, a resident of Andheri, was waiting outside Sridevi's residence since morning after learning that the actress' mortal remains will be flown from Dubai to her Lokhandwala residence. "I am heartbroken and have been her biggest fan, I have watched all her movies. I could not believe that she has left us for heavenly abode," she said.
"Our entire fraternity is mourning the death of Sridevi as she worked for the betterment of the special and handicap children. We had approached her to seek help for our NGO and she willingly paid us a visit," said Sunaina Bhanpurwala, co-ordinator for School of special children foundation, a NGO working for the betterment of special kids. The actor even helped them financially.
Students from special schools visited the building outside Green Acres with their parents and were waiting for a last glimpse of Sridevi.
Moreover, Asif Bhamla, a close family friend of Sridevi, met her at an event in Mumbai and Sridevi expressed her desire to work towards spreading awareness about the environment in Mumbai. "Sridevi had raised concerns about the environment in Mumbai. She had come forward to help our NGO and we were planning to hold an event with her," said Bhamla, president of Bhamla Foundation.
Sridevi’s fans from the south Indian film industry visited Green Acres on Sunday to condole the actress’ death. 
“I have seen all her movies. Sadma in 1983 touched my heart. Earlier I thought that the news is a rumour as we could see her elegantly wearing sarees and attending events,” said Kamalnath Nair, a hotelier from Bandra.
“I have come with my family to condole the death of our favourite actress. There has not been a single film of hers which we have not seen in the theatre. The south Indian film industry is grieving the death of the evergreen actress,” said Mona Bhandari, a small-time producer.
Rajesh Mukund, a fan of the actress, has planned to hold a ceremony to pray for her soul. “Whenever we watched her movies, I felt she is our family member. As a ritual we will hold a prayer meeting for her soul to rest in peace.”
This morning’s tea brought along sad news for this Indian couple from the United Kingdom (UK). Kishor and Rita Rajput are staying in a hotel in Juhu and they immediately left for the actress’ residence on reading the news of her death online.
“I saw the news and immediately took an auto rickshaw here. We came to know that Sridevi’s residence is in Lokhandwala. We searched for the address on our cell phones and came here,” said Kishor Rajput, 44. “It is shocking to hear about her death. We hope to see her before we leave for the UK,” added Rajput.
The couple added that they grew up watching her movies and were avid fans of her. The couple, along with other gathered fans, couldn’t help but wonder when Sridevi’s mortal remains would be brought back to Mumbai and what would happen next.
Not just youngsters but even senior citizens gathered outside the actress’ residence from the early morning and stayed the entire day. Mahendra Shah, 75, wore a sad look as he waited solemnly.
“I stay nearby. Came here early as soon as I got to know about her death. She was a great actress and it is a big loss,” said Mahendra Shah.
Sita Chavan, 63, arrived around noon with a bouquet in her hand. She came from Nalasopara and has been watching Sridevi’s movies for the past 20 years. “I am a great fan of Sridevi. I still have video cassettes of her films that I watch whenever I get the time. I asked the security guards to at least allow me to give these flowers to someone inside but wasn’t allowed. I will come back tomorrow,” said Chavan.
