For BJP leader Jai Ram Thakur, who is front-runner in the race of CM candidates in Himachal Pradesh, the top most priority would be to develop the state but by keeping environmental issues in mind in this sensitive hilly state.
Having been elected for record fifth time from Seraj in Mandi district, Thakur comes from a humble background of Thunag village which is about 65 kms from Mandi town. It has taken him three-and-a-half decade of hard work to reach where he is.
Having been state president and cabinet minister in Prem Kumar Dhumal's last cabinet, Thakur is known as a grass-root worker and representative of dominant Rajput community of the state, Thakur spoke to DNA exclusively on issues which he feels are of greater importance for the coming government. Excerpts:
That's because Congress dominated this second biggest constituency for decades. Be it Virbhadra Singh or Pandit Sukh Ram, they were representing this constituency for decades. Now that has been changed with BJP workers hard work. Look at the situation now, BJP has got 14 out of the total 17 seats from Mandi district.
The geography of the state is such that Himachal can't become an industrial hub. Rather, the state has lot of scope for tourism and there are whole lot of central government schemes which can be used to benefit our population here. Everyone should realise that our PM Narendra Modi ji has an emotional bonding with this state. He has spent prime years of his life here as party pracharak.
NGT ruling is certainly a cause of worry for our hotel industry. But we should not forget that we are also culprits in ignoring environmental issues for so long. It's time when all concerned parties have to seriously chalk out plans regarding these sensitive issues related to our environment and health. We can't go on like this for ever. We need to first regulate ourselves and then spread this message of clean environment across everyone coming to visit our state.
Whatever the party decide, I as a humble worker will follow. I would like to thank all the people of the state who for voted for our party. I can assure you from my side that whosoever will be given responsibility to rule Himachal, the first priority would be to improve the law and order situation, which has deteriorated under Congress rule.
