Transport Minister Kailash Gahlot has written to Lieutenant-Governor Anil Baijal, seeking a rollback of parking fee hike in the city, implemented to bring down the alarming levels of pollution. The parking fee was hiked as much as four times, which only led to "commuters parking on roadsides and in public malls," the minister said. "It appears that the decision was taken in a haste as the ramifications of this direction, unfolding now, seem to suggest that it is having a negative effect," the letter, dated November 14, stated. The decision to hike parking charges was not fulfilling the desired objective, he wrote.
"We do understand that environment is paramount. But, a four-fold hike in parking fee is akin to paying through your nose. Since my workplace is in Connaught Place, I end up paying over Rs 1,000 every day. The government must not penalise the public for the foul air and rather work throughout the year to tackle the problem," said Ashish Mittal, 33, who works with a marketing firm.
In the letter, Gahlot also said the National Green Tribunal (NGT), in its order dated November 11, had directed the Delhi government to reconsider the decision. "The Tribunal, with regard to construction, providing of parking areas, ensuring that those parking areas or buildings or multiple parkings are used in a regulatory manner, and parking on roadsides, is entirely discouraged," the letter stated.
The L-G's directives regarding the parking fee hike had come a day after the Supreme Court-mandated Environment Pollution Prevention and Control enforced the measures to be taken under the 'severe' category of the Graded Response Action Plan. The hike was rolled out by the municipal corporations, the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation, and Delhi Development Authority.
The three civic bodies manage most of the Capital's parking lots — the South Corporation operates 96 parking lots, while the North Corporation runs 104 parking lots and the East civic body has 45 lots.
The three corporations had earlier said they could not hike the parking fee without taking a decision in the meeting of the House. 
After the L-G's directive, however, the corporations issued a notification regarding the hike.
Meanwhile, the government has advanced introduction of ultra-clean Euro-VI grade petrol and diesel in the national Capital by two years to April 2018. In 2015, India had decided to leapfrog straight to Euro-VI emission norm complaint petrol and diesel from April 2020 from current Euro-IV grade. While the deadline for the rest of the country stands, for the Capital, choking on thick toxic smog, the deadline for introduction of BS-VI — equivalent to Euro-VI grade, has been preponed to April 2018, Petroleum Ministry said in a statement.
53%Students had visible respiratory symptoms like cough, sputum production, complaints of chest tightness and breathlessness
52%Said they were allergic to dust, smoke and pollen
51%Students said the pollution aggravated the symptoms
42%Students showed lung function impairment after their lung functioning was tested
11%Students were already on inhalers for their symptoms
Delhi361 very poor 
Ghaziabad418 very poor
Gurgaon350 very poor
Noida367 very poor
Faridabad334 very poor

