While Ganpati idols made of mud or recycled paper have been trending in the city in place of Plaster of Paris (PoP) figurines, there are other options that environmentally conscious devotees can go for. 
One such alternate is ‘Tree Ganesha’, which was conceptualised in 2015 by Dattadri Kothur, a Lower Parel resident. 
Rather than immersing the Tree Ganesha in a water body, devotees can water the organic idol it every day so it starts melting back into its mud pot, and seeds embedded in the idol begin germinating. 
“It is a step beyond eco-friendly.” Kothur says. “Usually, the eco-friendly concept concluded on the day of the immersion, but the ‘tree idol’ gives birth to new life in the form of a tree. Many people do site visits before placing orders. When I started in 2015, I had made only one idol for myself. In 2016, I got 300 orders, which slowly became a trend. This year, I have got around 4,000 orders from across the country,” the 31-year-old artist says.
“The idol will stay with the devotee in the form of a treek,” he adds.
A new trend is to have a chocolate idol, which was started by Rintu Rathod, a Santacruz resident. 
After Rathod first made a chocolate idol for the Ganesh festival at her home, the family immersed it in a bucket of milk and later distributed the milk to disadvantaged children.
Rathod, who has been taking orders from eager clients ever since, says, “We should celebrate festivals but not at the cost of our environment. With Chocolate Ganesha, we are following all the rituals without harming the environment, while bringing a smile to the faces of homeless  children who get chocolate milk as a treat.”
An idol made of cow dung, by a city-based non-profit, is in huge demand overseas. Rishi Jay Prakarsh, of  Surabhi Kutir Udyog Foundation, says, “Immersing a cowdung idol purifies the water as it settles heavy metals like lead and mercury. Devotees can also use the cowdung idol as fertilizer for plants.” 
Proceeds from the sale of these idols will go to a goshala in Vasai, which has 120 cows, he says. 
(Decor made of recycled paper, by artist Nana Shendkar)
Earlier, sellers would woo customers with low-priced thermocol sets (makhars), but now that the material is banned in the state, it is cardboard sets that are being presented to buyers this year. These do-it-yourself makhars are available as a bundle of sheets that can be assembled at home. “My family has made the shift to cardboard makhar this year,” said Saurabh Rane, a buyer browsing the designs on sale in Dadar. “There is hardly any customer buying thermocol makhars because of the confusion regarding its ban, so we have stocked cardboard options as well,” said Sandesh Dabde, who has been in the business for 20 years. “We tried selling thermocol decorations but most of the people are avoiding them this year,” said Deepak Dhoke, a seller in Lalbaugh. 
