On Wednesday noon, Parineeti Chopra, who usually posts glam pictures of herself promoting her films or bonding with her co-stars during the shoots, appeared with her face half covered with a mask on her Instagram account.
The actress, who is currently in the capital shooting for her next film, is dismayed at the worsening smog conditions in Delhi and put up a post urging everyone to take stock of the situation. “Two days of shooting in Delhi and my chest hurts, head hurts and throat is paining. Can’t believe we have let things go so far that human beings don’t have air to breathe anymore. Can’t imagine the situation for kids and elders. Guys, let’s all WAKE UP. We cannot be doing this to our planet.. #choked #delhismog”, wrote the actress.
Delhi’s worsening smog conditions have not only affected the common man but even the celebrities, who are in the capital either shooting for their movies or some other work. Varun Dhawan, too, is visibly dismayed at the situation, posting and reposting a number of tweets about it. In a video he has put up on his social media accounts, he is seen driving around Delhi roads.
“Burning of garbage is a big reason why pollution spreads or smog spreads. So it’s very important we recycle our ways. It’s not the most difficult thing to do, it’s quite simple. There is a campaign I’m doing for that. There will be some steps that I’ll put out as well,” he says. Clearly affected by the situation, he has also put up a picture of himself with a mask and a hazy background, stating that he has clicked this selfie to show everyone what actual smog looks like.
Another actor, who is using his social media accounts to spread awareness about this is Arjun Kapoor, who along with Parineeti, is shooting there. In a series of tweets, he writes, “What’s happening in Delhi is dangerous in more ways than one can imagine... I’m filming here as I type this and I’m fearing things aren’t gonna really get any better. We need to put politics and personal agendas aside, stopping the blame game and come together to find a solution otherwise all of us are gonna be affected in more ways than we realise.” 
He has reposted a video of an accident pile-up due to the poor visibility along with a tweet, ‘The video I posted was sent to me and as I stand and look out of the window the fear that engulfs me is that this is reality and it can happen to any of us if we aren’t extremely aware and careful. The smog is a dangerous long term and short term. Really hope things improve. Stay safe Delhi’.
Urging their fans to do their bit for the environment, it’s good to see these actors use their social media handles for a cause that demands immediate attention. And yes, stay safe Delhi.
