Officials at Sanjay Gandhi National Park (SGNP) are currently nursing two- approximately month and half old abandoned leopard cubs, which were brought to the park by forest officials from Ahmednagar on December 20.
As per forest officials it was a local farmer from Nandgaon village in Ahmednagar district who found two leopard cubs in his sugarcane farm on November 20, a decision was taken to send them to Manikdoh Rescue Center, in Junnar after several attempts to re-unite the cubs with the mother failed. However soon realising that the centre had no space to accommodate more leopards the cubs were sent to SGNP.
According to Dr Shailesh Pethe, Veterinary Officer, SGNP the cubs might have been abandoned or separated from their mother and both-one male and another female were brought in quite a delicate condition.
"The cubs that are separated from their mothers have very low immunity and hand raising them is not as simple as it sounds. They are currently coping up to the new environment and will require several weeks to settle down," shared Pethe adding that a lot of precaution were being taken and they were even being monitored round the clock.
As per the expert Vet, for the good health of these two cubs and to ensure that they do not catch any infection they have been kept in a restricted area and maximum precautions were being taken by not even allowing any visitors to see these cubs. "We are keeping them away as they are at a very vulnerable stage and only people involved in their care taking are allowed to go near them. "
Anwar Ahmed, Chief Conservator of Forest (CCF) and Field Director for SGNP said, "These two cubs had to be brought to SGNP as Manikdoh Rescue Center, in Junnar has no space to take more leopards. Our team is taking good care of these cubs and at the moment they are in good health."
Forest officials from SGNP said that in the past that several leopards have been successfully hand raised and some have even unfortunately died few months after they were brought due to various infections resulting due to low immunity.

