In a major relief for shopkeepers and consumers, the state government may allow the use of plastic at the retailers end for packaging groceries and foodstuff.
However, this will be subjected to conditions like the use of plastic above 50 microns in thickness and fulfillment of end-users responsibility by manufacturers of collecting and recycling the plastic waste.
"There is a plan to exempt retailers from the ban and allow them to use plastic for packaging," said a senior official from the state environment department. He added that the proposal has been approved by the experts committee last week and will be tabled before the Empowered Committee of ministers that is likely to meet this week.
"However, this will come with a commitment to recycling the plastic waste. The plastic bags must also mention the source, namely the name of the manufacturer and type of plastic. It must also be above 50 microns in thickness," he added.
Retailers have complained that while industrial primary packaging has been exempted from the ban, it was banned at their end. This was despite the fact that some products like chips, which has multi-level packaging, does more harm to the environment, they said.
"Terms like primary and secondary packaging are misleading. For example, if a retailer purchases a sack or container of rice from Igatpuri and sells it in his shop by packing it into smaller packages, how will you classify it? Primary or secondary packaging," he questioned. The official said that around 80 per cent of retail businesses conduct packaging at their end, especially for commodities like dal, masala, and rice.
The official noted that the ban on the use of plastic for packaging at the retailers level would make things difficult for traders in rural areas. Admitting the need for clarifications about items that were banned and exempted under the rule, he said Maharashtra Pollution Control Board (MPCB) officials would meet implementing authorities from local bodies in a series of meetings to be held at the regional level to sort out issues.
Meanwhile, Viren Shah, Federation of Retail Traders Welfare Association (FRTWA) said they had been asked by the state government to submit a proposal regarding the buyback of the transparent plastic packaging. "These will be sealed, transparent bags," he explained, adding that the buyback will be done by retailers and manufacturers.
