Given the fact that not many are aware of light pollution and its impact — not only on human health but also on nocturnal animals and birds — Awaaz Foundation, an NGO that works for the environment, has begun creating awareness on this type of pollution in urban areas. The foundation carried out the first of its kind recording of light levels at Juhu Beach to prove that installing hundreds of high-powered light masts at the beach in the name of security is a myth. Besides, despite these masts, several patches along the shore including near the water remain dark.
Awaaz Foundation is opposing Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation's (BMC) move to put up such lights across the city's beaches citing that the high-intensity LED lighting will be a disturbance to residential buildings in the vicinity, lead to adverse health effects, and obstructs natural views of the night sky.
The NGO has written to the BMC and Environment Department to consider the harmful effects of light pollution before formulating policies or projects for the beautification of beaches and other natural areas especially those close to residential areas.
The most important task at hand is to inform people about how this light pollution is impacting them and their health as general public is still unaware about light pollution. BMC as well as the Environment Department need to consider framing a suitable policy to regulate light pollution in Mumbai from various sources including street lighting, private security lighting, hoardings, beautification projects and others.—Sumaira Abdulali, Convenor, Awaaz Foundation
Excess light at night causes disturbances to the human and animal biological clock. It disturbs the body's hormonal balance, increases stress levels and effects the retina which is an important part of the eye. Science has proven that constant exposure to such light effects the retina. While there has been data on the adverse effects of light pollution on animal models, there is yet none on the effects on human models.—Dr Samyak Mulkutkar, Consultant, PD Hinduja Hospital & MRC
It isn't actually pollution, at least not on Juhu Beach. The light's intensity depends on the tide. When the tide is high, the intensity of the light is less. And the intensity only increases when the tide is low and the water is right behind.—Priti Gandhi, Juhu
Light pollution is beyond comprehension for most but it affects everybody. One is trying to sleep when bright light is on. Another is when a vehicle with its head lamps on full beam comes towards you, it has a blinding effect.—Ruchi Sabharwal, Andheri
As citizens, we are taking urban light pollution lightly. The halogen culture in almost all events in the city causes the most irritating kind of urban light pollution. Our bodies need a soothing substitute to counter the harsh effects of such pollution. Right now, the awareness and understanding about light pollution is very less compared to that on other forms of pollution. People need to be more enlightened about this.—Harsha Purandare, Shivaji Park
The excess use of light has killed the city's natural beauty. With each passing day, we see high mast lighting being installed at various nooks and corners in Mumbai. The authorities can use low power light to save energy and also protect the ambience of a place. Now we are seeing that even beaches are being lit up. In the race to get credit, politicians are using every possible opportunity to go against nature. It is useless to light a beach at night after a certain time as people may not even go there and extra light is nothing but a wastage of money.—Javed Khan, Andheri
I don't think there is much issue of light pollution in Mumbai apart from the kind of white and other colourful lights that are used in events and on vehicles on the roads. I think more than light pollution, noise and air pollution are serious issues in the city. The authorities should take efforts to decrease the level of noise and air pollution so that people would be less affected by them.—Shubham Singh, Bhandup
Laser beams at marriage functions in open grounds and at annual days of schools have piercing light rays. I feel burnt out and my eyes take some time to settle to the new blitz attacks from electronic beams. We need to keep it simple and accept that light pollution is hurting us. Probably the newer generation stand exposed to this beyond acceptance. All of us should stand up against light pollution in urban areas.—Sanjay Prashar, Andheri
We are not even aware about light pollution and its dangers like we are on other forms of pollution. Because of technology, we are not taking it seriously. Whenever there is a day and night match or some practice session in my vicinity, the flood lights enter the room from the windows and disturbs sleep. With the government considering a night life for the city, it will only create more urban light pollution. This will disturb the sleep cycle of people. When one is travelling on highways even high beam headlights from cars are pollution.—Mahendra Hemdev, Churchgate
The problem with the authorities is that they don't plan their policies and projects before implementing them. For instance, light pollution is not just about the high lux of bulbs but also where the light lands. At many locations in the city, the light from these high-powered lamps falls right into residences which not only affects the human biological clock but also invades privacy.—Aakash Sarawal, Matunga
