An environment organisation has filed a Public Interest Litigation (PIL) in the Bombay High Court in order to save 168 trees that would allegedly have to be cleared to connect Bhandup railway station (west) with LBS Road.
The proposed road will be 13-metre-wide, and it will connect to MVR Shinde road near Jayesh Industrial Estate. It will provide a direct connectivity with the platform number 1 of the station from LBS Road. At present, there is only one exit at the station on the western side and the proposed road will ease pressure from the existing road to exit from the platform to the west.
Vikram Yende of Green Umbrella, which filed the PIL in July, clarified that they are not against development but are requesting for the consideration of another existing parallel road to MVR Shinde Road, which is near GKW industry as per the old development plan. 
“We have gathered information from BMC officials as well as carried out our own survey and found that around 168 trees might require removal for the missing link. During our survey, we found that these trees are home to scores of birds as several nests were spotted along with many species of birds that get food and shelter from these trees,” he said, adding that the matter has been now listed for hearing on August 21.
Sandeep Jadhav, secretary of Koteshwar Deep building located on the MVR Shinde road, said they cannot believe that BMC can even think of destroying such beautiful trees when an alternative is available. 
“This area is like a green oasis and the trees have not only helped managing temperatures during summer but also since the area is not concretised there is no flooding. We hope better sense prevails and BMC takes up the road from the industrial area and uses it as it also has an advantage that it straight connects to the station.”
Meanwhile, BMC officials said the work of felling of trees will only be taken up after permissions are granted by the Tree Authourity and the process is yet to start. “Now that the matter is in court we would not like to comment on the plans but we would like to ensure that there is minimum damage to the green zone,” said a senior official.
The proposed road will be 13-metre-wide, and it will connect to MVR Shinde road near Jayesh Industrial Estate. It will provide a direct connectivity with the platform number 1 of the station from LBS Road
