Last seen on stage in 2007 in the play Surya ki antim kiran se surya ki pehli kiran tak, award-winning actor Neena Gupta returns to the stage this weekend after a hiatus of about seven years. In Mera Woh Matlab Nahin Tha, Gupta and fellow actor Anupam Kher essay the roles of two lovers who drifted apart for no particular reason. They attempt to discover the truth upon meeting years later. Days before opening night, the versatile and powerful performer, who has been rehearsing for the last two months, makes time to talk about what it feels like to be back on stage.
You haven't been seen much in the last three-four years. What have you been busy with?I've been busy managing my daughter's business. That takes up all my time.
So how did, Mera Woh Matlab Nahin Tha, come about? What appealed to you about the part that you are essaying in the play?Rakesh (Bedi) called me and asked if I was interested in doing a play and I said yes. He came over to narrate the script, which I liked it, and so it happened. It is very difficult to describe why I like this part. I suppose if you watch the play, you won't ask this question (laughs). It's a fantastic part. The play, although it has a few actors, is mostly about two people — Anupam (Kher's) character and mine. Am playing the part of a woman who meets Anupam's character after many, many years, and the two relate their lives to one another, and what happens after that. The play is very interesting. I've never done anything like this before, and so it has been quite challenging too. The most important thing is that the play has all kinds of emotions and am sure people will identify with it. Also, despite all the various emotions, it is a happy play, it is a fun play.
Can you describe the experience of working with director Rakesh Bedi.Writing a play is a very difficult task, and he has done a very good job with Mera woh matlab nahin tha. He has written three plays before this. And because he has so much experience, he does these (small) things that are amazing. For instance, if I kept forgetting cues or lines at one place all the time, he would tell me how to remember, which is something nobody ever told me. He is fantastic. Also, he is very open and has no ego problems. He knows what he wants and yet you can always improvise, discuss and argue things with him. So it has been a good experience.
You last appeared on stage in 2007 for Surya ki antim kiran se.... Are you excited or nervous?I'm dying! I'm nervous... I am excited. I can't sleep...I can't eat...We've been rehearsing for two months. And although we rehearse for six hours, it hasn't been taxing because we take breaks. When we get tired, we just leave and start over the next day. It feels great though (to be back on stage).
You produced Saans to show that a middle-aged woman can be a lead protagonist. There haven't been many such path-breaking TV shows or movies since. Why do you think that is the case?I said it at that time (1999) and I'd say the same now. This is the case because in real life, in India, in 80% of the houses, middle-aged women or a woman above the age of 40, is only good for looking after children and for looking after the house. She is useless otherwise. This is why there are such few roles for middle-aged women. Look at the roles I keep getting offered – I'm either being asked to portray somebody's mother or somebody wife. Just the other day, someone called from a production house to ask if I was free for particular days of shoot. When I said yes, and asked for the script to be emailed to me, they sent me the shoot dates instead. So I called the person and asked why there was no script, and he said something like, arrey, mummy ka role hi to hai.So, when this is how they women are treated, it will reflect in our culture. Back in the days when I was a student, we used to say that Sahitya, samaj ka darpan hota hai, meaning literature is a mirror to society. And so that's the case with the portrayal of women in our movies and on television.
So, what would your dream role then be?I have recently finished a film which gave me the most amazing role. This one is probably my life's best one so far. The film, Threshold, is directed by (theatre director and cinematographer) Pushan Kripalani, but there's no release date set for it as yet.
marisha.karwa@dnaindia.net; @marishaKarwa
