Samit Basu drew a packed crowd for his session at the Zee Jaipur Literature Festival. The session "From Here to Hogwarts" which began with a worldbuilding exercise went on to become a lively discussion on fantasy and writing. The session was quite interactive as Basu devoted more than half an hour to taking questions from the predominantly young audience. In the worldbuilding exercise Basu creating a plot about a girl named Maya with the audience. Following this, Basu invited questions on all the audience wanted to know about writing and being a writer. From calling the phrase 'I am my own toughest critic' hopelessy self-congratulatory to  encouraging a 14-year-old girl to write without worries about the future of writing, Basu had much advice and encouragement to offer. Here are his top ten tips- 
On becoming a writer- Don't become a writer to be rich or famous.
On building worlds- You should know your whole world. But don't reveal all your cards. Remember the Iceberg rule, (where you see only the tip of the iceburg above the water and the rest is submerged below) you don't need to show the reader everything you know. Krissh and Ra.One are bad fantasy stories. You have to ensure the world you are building is convincing and what the characters do within that is believable.
Knowing the end of the story while writing- There is no hard and fast rule. Books can start from anywhere and anything.
Writer's block- Remind yourself that writing is just work. There are good and bad days. We are writers, so we named the block. By naming it we've given it power. Don't worry and don't make excuses for it.
Cliches - It is impossible to be entirely new. Develop judgement on whether your voice is strong enough.
On giving up reading while writing- If you're going to write, you should get used to giving up a lot.
Dealing with bad reviews - I've been lucky. I've gotten more good reviews than bad. With the bad ones, you either ignore it or look at what you can take from it to improve your work.
Balancing story and sub-stories - You have to be able to zoom into the scene to write it and then zoom out to see how it is working with the whole story.
On improving as a writer - It never stops. Read more and write more. There is no perfect way to improve. Everyone muddles through.
Tying up loose ends in a story - If you're unsure of what to do or waiting for a second book deal, then by all means do it. You've to take a call on how unsatisfied you want to leave your reader. But don't leave your main crisis unresolved.
