The Bhendi Bazaar Urdu Festival, which revealed secrets about the city and the Urdu language, is back after a delay in its second year. To be held between February 27 and March 1, the festival promises to be bigger and better this time.
Introduced to highlight Urdu literature's trajectory and evolution through the works of writers and poets who made Bhendi Bazaar their den, it will delve deeper into their life in its second version.
Organised by Urdu Markaz, an organisation that works for the promotion of the language and the culture, the festival will be held at Imambada ground near Dongri. Last year, it was held from January 10 to 12. "This time the expanse will be more. We have managed to get a ground nearby where our events will be held. This time, we are looking towards going micro with the aspects that we launched ourselves," said Zubair Azmi, director of the Urdu Markaz.
Among the various programmes included in the events will be a heritage walk during which citizens can go into the house of legendary Urdu Poet Sadat Hasan Manto and Jan Nisar Akhtar, father of Javed Akhtar. Last year, the citizens were only shown their houses from outside.
Another programme will have a singer from the Bhendi Bazaar Gharana to let the interested people know what it is all about. Lata Mangeshkar belongs to this gharana.
"The Bhendi Bazaar Gharana mostly has recitals that are in praise of Hindu Gods. Having a singer will give listeners a taste of the originality of the gharana. This will also show the confluence of the cultures," said Azmi.
Last year, the festival had informed about the dens of various Urdu poets — from classical to progressive to modern — in the area. "This time too it will be there, but the participation of students in the work of their discourse will be much more. The idea is that bright students should come forward and talk about it," said Azmi.
Additions have been made to other aspects like dramas, talks on various subjects and photographic exhibitions that will depict the life in earlier times. "This time, we have also managed to get photographs of Urs of Abdul Rehman Shah Baba. One talk will be related to the recent controversy on the Charlie Hebdo cartoon. Freedom of speech does not mean ridiculing faith and this is what will be talked about," said Azmi.
A separate segment will be made out of the letters that Javed Akhtar's mother wrote to her husband and they will be introduced as songs.
"Some things like couplets that traced the language in the city to the reign of Bahadur Shah Zafar will exist along with the various delicacies that are served for food connoisseurs to enjoy the festival," added Azmi.
