The eighth edition of the Zee Jaipur Literature Festival, an annual literary event concluded on Sunday with organisers vowing to continue the celebration of creative freedom of speech and expression. "With each edition of the festival our morals get boosted to continue celebrating the ultimate freedom of speech and expression so that no elements in society can curb it and take away the power of knowledge from us," Festival Producer Sanjay Roy said.
Appreciating the support by local police Roy said, "We are thankful to the police who ensured that the session went on peacefully and there were no disruptions. Chief Minister Raje also appreciated the festival for taking Jaipur on a global map."
Former President APJ Abdul Kalam and Nobel Laureate VS Naipaul took the centrestage at the festival with the organisers restricting entry into the venue due to jampacked sessions. Naipaul also broke down twice during the festival after listening to travel writer Paul Theroux, with whom he had reportedly his first public reunion in 19 years and as he shared the journey of him being a struggling writer to a Nobel Laureate.
Congress MP Shashi Tharoor took on Prime Minister Narendra Modi for maintaining "silence" on his ministers comments on controversial issues and conversion campaign by groups like the VHP. The "Shiva" trilogy fame author Amish Tripathi announced at the festival that his next series for which had signed a whooping Rs 5 crore deal last year, will be on Lord Ram.
In a first, unique satellite events were planned at historic Amer Fort and Hawa Mahal. While actor Naseerudin Shah recited poetry of Manto at Amer on the opening day, Shabana Azmi recited poetry on Day 2 at the Hawa Mahal.
With a line up of around 234 authors from backgrounds ranging from international relations, history and environment, to human nature, regional literature, art, photography, Bollywood, theatre and travel, the festival covered a wide slice of the literary world. According to estimates by organisers the number of footfalls in the event was "over two lakh 45 thousand." 
Also Read: Bangladesh war of liberation discussed at Zee Jaipur Literature Festival
