When I saw the billboard telling me that Celebrate Bandra was just around the corner, I couldn't help but write about it. The week-long festival, which started on November 18 and will continue until November 25, has managed to take not only Bandra residents but also the entire city by surprise, since its inception in 2003. The festival, which is taking place at hotspots like Bandstand, Carter Road, Mcubed Library, St. Andrew’s College and more, is here once again with newer experiences up its sleeve.
Celebrate Bandra was conceptualised with a view to bring people together through world-class entertainment that is free of cost and accessible to all. It showcases professional talent and provides a platform for budding talent to grow. Since different places in Bandra are hosting the festival, it is all the more vibrant and fun.The pool of talent is impossible to ignore with such a wide variety. With culture, photography, drama, art and even activities for kids, the options are endless. However, the main essence of the festival is to capture the beauty of Bandra.
Art at its bestWhen we think of art, we imagine fine paintings in a furnished gallery. This festival, however, offers a variety of art ranging from street art and light paintings along with professionals to guide the participants.
Music and literatureWhen we talk about culture, music and literature are a must. Tributes to famous bands like The Beatles, independent bands like Daira and other Mumbai-born bands are on the list. Besides these, individual artists are all set to perform. As for the literature, in-depth discussions on the origin of Bandra over four centuries, makes for an intellectual and informative evening. Besides that, the art of short story writing and appreciation will be taught at one of Bandra's finest media institutes, St. Pauls Institute of Communication Education.
What's in store for the kids?A significant change seen in Celebrate Bandra over the years is that now, there is a new kid's section. For kids, nature inspires creativity. A workshop, as part of Celebrate Bandra, intends to introduce kids to nature and then encourage them to translate it onto the digital forum. In addition, art appreciation, movie screenings, quizzes and poetry writing are bound to broaden a child's outlook beyond mere textbooks.There will also be wellness and fitness activities to attract health aficionados. The festival is a mixed bag of delights involving learning, fun and adventure. To know more, visit www.celebratebandra.com
