A novel is more likely to bag a prize if the focus of the narrative is male, a new analysis of the last 15 years of winners of six major literary awards has shown.
Critically-acclaimed author Nicola Griffith looked at the winners of the Pulitzer, Man Booker, National Book award, National Book Critics' Circle award, Hugo and Newbery medal winners over the last 15 years and collated their gender, and that of their protagonists.
She found that for the Pulitzer, for example, "women wrote zero out of 15 prize-winning books wholly from the point of view of a woman or girl".
"For the prize that recognises 'the most distinguished fiction by an American author', not a single book-length work from a woman's perspective or about a woman was considered worthy. Women aren't interesting, this result says. Women don't count," she said on her Website.
The Man Booker, between 2000 and 2014, was won by nine books by men about men or boys, three books by women about men or boys, two books by women about women or girls, and one book by a woman writer about both.
Meanwhile, the US National Book award over the same period, found Griffith, was won by eight novels by men about men, two books by women about men, one book by a man about both, three books by a woman about both, and two books by women about women, the Guardian reported on Monday.
"It is hard to escape the conclusion that, when it comes to literary prizes, the more prestigious, influential and financially remunerative the award, the less likely the winner is to write about grown women.
"Either this means that women writers are self-censoring, or those who judge literary worthiness find women frightening, distasteful, or boring. Certainly the results argue for women's perspectives being considered uninteresting or unworthy," Griffith said.
When women win literary awards for fiction it is usually for writing from a male perspective and/or about men. The more prestigious the award, the more likely the subject of the narrative will be male."The literary establishment doesn't like books about women. Why?" she asked.
"The answer matters. Women's voices are not being heard. Women are more than half our culture. If half the adults in our culture have no voice, half the world's experience is not being attended to, learnt from or built upon. Humanity is only half what we could be,"
Industry expert Danuta Kean said: "We have an overwhelming cultural bias that is against women, and is against the domestic,"
"And we don't question that cultural bias when it comes to judging prizes. I'm not saying people are prejudiced, but we have innate biases. And women can be just as bad, sometimes even worse, than men for this, and it will translate into every aspect of the judgments we make." 
