Mount Litera School International brought Bookaroo-Children's Literature Festival to Mumbai, where writers and artists from across the world conducted several kind of sessions for the young participants. We chatted up with John Dougherty, a popular Irish poet, author and songwriter, who conducted sessions at the fest. Dougherty, a former teacher, apart from writing, enjoys visiting schools to conduct reading sessions and, reciting poetry and singing songs to the kids.
How did you come to write children’s books?
It’s a long story, but in brief: when I trained to be a teacher, the course included a focus on children’s literature and I fell in love with children’s books all over again. Eventually, I started writing stories for my class, and then sending stories to publishers. 
Why do you find it easier to relate to children?
I have a clear memory of realising, when I was young, that some grown-ups had completely forgotten what it was like to be a child. I vowed to myself that I would always try to remember. When you wrote the Stinkbomb & Ketchup-Face series, were there any real life characters that you would refer to?
My children, Noah and Cara, very definitely provided the initial inspiration and I think a lot of the stories’ sense of playfulness is inspired by them. There are a few specific moments in the stories, too, that directly draw on them or on other children I know. And one or two lines which were born when one of them said something funny and added, “You should put that in a book,” and I thought, “Yes! I should!"
 What is your earliest memory of illustrating comics from secondary school?
I’m really not an illustrator! Some friends and I used to spend lunchtime writing and drawing funny comics in which ridiculous things happened; a lot of them featured insects, because they’re easier to draw than people. My main character was The 6½p Bluebottle, inspired by the then very popular TV series, The Six Million Dollar Man.  
 In today's age of political correctness are there any taboos that affect your work?
To me, “political correctness” is just one category of "good manners". It’s very poor manners to stereotype or disparage somebody else on  race, gender, their sexuality, abilities or disabilities or differences from some arbitrary concept of normality. If you can’t write a good story without doing that, you’re probably not a very good writer. So, no, I don’t feel there are any taboos because of political correctness.  
 In the literary world, who has been your inspiration?
We don’t have long enough for me to list them all! Favourites from my childhood include CS Lewis, Richard Adams, Enid Blyton, Roald Dahl, William Croft Dickinson… Current authors whose work inspires me include Jo Cotterill, Philip Reeve, Julia Donaldson, AF Harrold… And that’s just from the children’s section. I could also name Ray Bradbury, Margaret Atwood, Anne Tyler, Terry Pratchett, Neil Gaiman… The lists are endless!
 Of the books you have written, which is a personal favourite?
I’m no good at picking favourites, I’m afraid! I often tell children that asking a writer to pick a favourite from their books is like asking a parent to pick a favourite child: I’m very proud of all of them, for many different reasons, but I couldn’t choose one and set it above the others.
 Is there any upcoming novel that you are working on and can you give us a brief about it?
Yes, there are, and no, I can’t! Sorry! They’re at too early a stage of development. I can tell you that one idea I’m working on draws from Greek legend, and another is a comedy aimed at much the same readership as Stinkbomb & Ketchup-Face, but other than that, you’ll have to wait.
 How do your books keep the pace with the digital world – ebooks, audio books etc.?
I’m not sure books really need to keep pace with the digital world. I think they’re a timeless technology; they may be presented in different ways, but ultimately a good story is a good story, whether it’s printed, recorded or digitised.   
Why did you choose children's literature over other genres?  
I think children’s literature chose me! Writing for children is a craft and an art in itself; it requires particular skills, which I think - I hope - I possess, and I enjoy using them. That said, I know that adults often enjoy my books as much as their children do; I like to think that I write family books, in much the same way that Hollywood makes family movies.  
 Your stories are different, be it the Zeus series or Jack Slater- what is the idea you maintain when writing these quirky stories?
Writing most of my stories, the question I keep asking myself is, “Is this funny?” I think humour is hugely underrated; I believe it’s very important for the individual, for society, and for children’s development. Something that’s genuinely funny can be thought-provoking and creativity-inspiring and help children question the world around them in new ways.

