Anurag: Do we often miss out on high-quality literature in India because of no translations? Are there any regional writers whose works have been translated that you would recommend? And would also recommend some notable ones that you think ought to be translated?”
Aakar: Hypothetically, yes, that I suppose that in a nation with so many languages, there will be many writers who have passed completely unobserved for most people who don't read that language – might not even know their names. But, sadly, I think for the most part, it's not true that if there were truly an outstanding writer who wrote about a human condition as it is lived through in India, we would have noticed such a writer. The Russian greats of the 19th century such as Tolstoy and Dostoevsky and people like that – they told their country what it was, they told Russians what Russia was like; they told them what it mean to be Russians. Do we have such writers in India? I don't think we do. Personally, I think that the writer that I would like to see more translated is a man called Sheikh Adam Abuwala, who wrote in Gujarati and in Urdu. Most people haven't heard of him, but he is the man who wrote much of Pankaj Udhas' ghazals; and very diverse quality to his writing, great spectrum, he worked for a German agency. I think he spoke of bit of German, spoke Gujarati and Urdu and English really well. Wrote like a God and I wish that he were available in translation. So, I think that if you're looking to access a write who writes about us quite well, but hasn't been noticed, I would point you to him.
Latika: What do you think of Chetan Bhagat’s performance as a judge of a reality show on TV?
Aakar: Latika, I think Chetan Bhagat is fantastic as a judge and I expected him to be. And I think he is A VERY bright man. On TV, he understands the way the game is played. The first thing is, he puts himself out, if you notice, he has no shyness in him, or if he had, he sets that aside and he goes to the stage, and does his little antic for the day. The other thing is he know that in India, celebrity is everything. Ghalib said, badnaam hoenge to kya naam na hoga. It doesn’t matter what it is that you do, whether you achieve fame of notoriety, as long as you are in the public eye, you are good. Chetan Bhagat understands that. 
Sameer: Do you think that restaurants and bars in big cities in India are increasingly atrociously priced – we seem to have first world pricing with none of the first world quality or service?
Aakar: I think you’re quite right for the most part. Alcohol in other counties in our part of the world, say south east Asia – Thailand, you could get a large premium whiskey – a Black Label – for about 200-250 Baht, which is around 300 rupees, I think, whereas in India, you couldn’t get it for less than six or seven times that. So, it is outrageously priced here. Part of that is the structure of customs and excise, but I think for the most part, the separation of society in India is that we have a bunch of people who are well off and a bunch of people who can’t afford much at all. And I think that restaurants aim for either one of the other. I would disagree with one facet of what you said, which is one the service side. I think service in India is very good. People who travel to India from the west especially are struck by how good our service is at the expensive places. At places like airlines, in five star hotels, in good restaurants. You get fantastic service. So, I think our service is really good, the pricing is really bad – some of the quality is not that good either.
This is an extract from Ask Aakar Anything, a weekly podcast. You can listen to the rest of the show here:www.audiomatic.in. DNA readers can send their questions for Aakar Patel to aaa@audiomatic.in with DNA in the subject line.
