Arts has always been a highly misunderstood stream. It has been tagged as a recourse for those who do not get admission in any other stream. Even today, people believe that Arts is taken up by people who or are studying just for the sake of it. Some even subscribe to the ideology that this stream is for women because it provides you with an easy degree as you’re not going to be working anyway. But at the end of the day this is just a nonsensical theory people have been conditioned to believe over the years.
Here’s a list of a few misconceptions about Arts as a stream and people who choose to pursue it.
It is a common misconception that this stream is similar to Fine Arts. They are two completely different things. Fine Arts is applied arts which basically includes everything that’s got to do with the creative side along with the skill of one’s hands. While Arts as a stream covers a variety of subjects and career opportunities like Psychology, Sociology, Economics, Literature etc.
Simply because people tend to think that Arts has no scope or it has courses that give more ‘work-from-home’ options, it is assumed to be a feminine course. On the contrary, Arts has a wide array of options. It is a highly misunderstood stream that’s wrongly burdened by silly misconceptions. There are quite a number of influential male personalities who have graduated from Arts. Wilhelm Wundt, the man who is considered to be the father of psychology, is just one such name. 
Most people believe that Arts is for those who are lax and lazy, it’s considered as a chilled-out stream. On the contrary, majority of the Arts subjects are theoretical in nature and require in-depth knowledge about the subject matter at hand. For instance, sociology students need to dissect social organizations and learn the culture, traditions, behaviour and understand the root cause of common social problem that are prevalent in society before they can devise a well though out course of action.
Every profession needs skilled and talented people. So it is completely wrong to think that people who score less should opt for Arts. Your previous scores do not decide your aptitude for anything that you wish to study. Also, there is no official rule that people with good scores should abstain from choosing Arts.
IN ASSOCIATION WITH WWW.CAREERNINJA.IN
