The contribution of countless Indian soldiers, largely unsung and forgotten, during the First World War, has been chronicled in a new book that was launched on Friday.
Titled Indian Troops in Europe, it draws from several documents of the era, which were never published before.
Authored by Santanu Das, the book was launched by French Ambassador to India Francois Richier at the Delhi World Book Fair here. "The book highlights the bravery and sacrifice of Indian soldiers in the battlefield during the First World War," Richier said. "Several documents, which were never published before, have also been used for the book," he added.
While a lot has certainly been written about the War, about the magnificent victories and astounding defeats, but Das' book is an addition to that collection of literature that speaks about the ordinary soldiers, who fought and sacrificed themselves on the war front.
Divided into four chapters, the book takes the readers on a journey through history, complementing the experience with rare monochromatic images. It also features the Battle of Neuve Chapelle in France, and sheds light on the living conditions of the soldiers, treatment of soldiers after the War and the ordeal of their families back home in India, Richier said.
"After the announcement of the War, Lord Hardinge (the then Viceroy of India) did not counsult the Indian leaders if they wished to join the war. Nevertheless, both Indian National Congress and Indian Muslim League, agreed to come on board despite the ongoing national movement in the country," said Bipin Shah, Director of Mapin Publishing, the publisher of the book. Reading interesting anecdotes from the book, he added that "at least 1.1 million Indian soldiers were deployed during the War."
It also talks about Neuve Chapelle British Cemetery and India Gate (War Memorial Arch), which was to perpetuate their contributions during the Great War. The memorial to the fallen heroes not only has inscriptions but also names of Indian soldiers engraved on it.
Das previously has authored 'Touch and Intimacy in First World War Literature' published by the Cambridge University Press.
