Rajdeep Sardesai blamed “the McDonaldisation” of the media for its current state. A packed Prithvi Theatre applauded the senior TV journalist and cheered only to be admonished. “You know you can clap and cheer, but when you are hungry for news you will look for something instant and head to McDonalds.”
Sardesai was part of a panel discussion on ‘The Genuine Article: Uncovering the truth in an ocean of headlines,’ at the Tata Literature Live festival in Mumbai along with Avirook Sen (media person and author, Aarushi), Lorraine Adams (writer and journalist ex-Washington Post), chaired by senior TV journalist Sreenivasan Jain.
Lamenting the unwillingness of those with means to support a free press, he recounted bitterly the circumstances surrounding how he came to quit his ex-channel. “It was like they had taken a supari on the Aam Aadmi Party,” he said, again to much cheering from the audience for his forthrightness.
In fact, such was the response to Sardesai that even Lorraine Adams remarked, “You are the most entertaining on this panel.”
Avirook Sen reminded the panel that some of the ills plaguing the media were because of the culture of celebrity journalists. “Today, when young reporters come into the profession they look at you and they don’t want to become journalists. They want to become celebrities like you.”
Sreenivasan Jain had to explain to Lorraine what he meant when the audience cracked up with his remark about Indian TV journalism. “Just like what Fox News did to TV journalism in America, Indian TV journalism too has been Arnabised,” he said adding, “Opinion and not actual news has become the mainstay of our primetime.”
Avirook Sen quickly corrected him, “Super primetime,” leading to much cheering and claps from the audience.
Sardesai also reminded the audience that the English TV media gives itself far too much importance. “It’s only 1% or lesser for the entire media. In Bihar, where I was travelling recently voters aren’t really bothered with what we are saying. They are more driven by what the local media is saying.” He recounted what one local told him in Kishenganj. “You can show Asaduddin Owaisi as much as you want to get TRPs, but we will decide on who we want to vote for.”
Lorraine said that the average voter in the US is also relying on several sources of information at once unlike before. “Sometimes one doesn’t know if that’s such a good thing as it gives the likes of a Donald Trump a lead over others.”
In the midst of the rising chorus in the country over growing intolerance in the country, Sardesai introduced a new dynamic. “While it’s great that we are raising the issue of intolerance. Why are we in the media so tolerant of hunger, poverty and farmer suicides? Why don’t we agonise as much if not more on these pressing issues too?”
