The culture season continued in north India with the seventh India Art Fair (IAF) in the capital this week, close on the heels of the Zee Jaipur Literature Festival (ZeeJLF). It might be a bit like comparing apples and oranges, but the two are, undoubtedly, the most premier cultural events in the private sector in India today. They are also the most vibrant, the largest, most sought-after and attract the biggest names in their fields.As many as 85 galleries participated in the four-day fair that began Jan 29 and ends Sunday - the usual mix of leading names from all the Indian metros (and a few smaller ones like Ahmedabad, Vadodara and Jaipur) and an assortment from abroad. Many like ArtChowk (Karachi), Contempop Expressions (Tel Aviv), Nielson (Spain), Art18/21 (Norwich, UK), were repeat exhibitors but there were also some newcomers such as Opiom Gallery from France, which showcased the works of JeeYoung Lee, a rising star from Korea. It's an indication of how business is good at IAF - last year, nearly all exhibitors reported good sales with some selling out completely.But IAF is not just about buying and selling. For the vast majority of the 100,000-plus visitors who shell out Rs.400 for the daily passes, it is about just looking at art. For most of them, it's their only opportunity to look at such a range of contemporary art from India and all over the world.This year, for the first time, IAF got an artistic director, Girish Sahane, to curate artworks. These 22 art projects scattered through the fair grounds were clearly the highlights. "We realised that it was important to stir things up a little, to create impact, and inspire people with the kind of works, which may or may not come from the galleries," explains festival director Neha Kirpal, adding that galleries, who were looking primarily at selling their works, would only bring those they considered more saleable.
Performance art made its presence with Chitra Ganesh and Dhruvi Acharya's painting live in front of viewers. Mohammed Zeeshan's 'On Indefiniteness' was another performative piece which enacts the opposite - how, over time, a work of art gets obliterated. Then there was Manuel Joao Viera's 'Counter Plan' in which he paints and plays music while a video loop plays in the background, and Priyanka Choudhary's 'The Art of Papilio Demoleus (or how to become The Lemon Butterfly)', in which she sits on a stool and eats the leaves of a lemon plant kept on another stool which she plucks with her leaves.
Interactive art also got a look in with 'Artistic Participation', which invites viewers to photograph a work of art and upload it on a web-based microsite on a phone or tablet which then proceeds to interpret the artwork and pronounce whether it is good or bad - technology, it seems, can well replace the human critic/connoisseur.Atul Bhalla's interactive maze of turnstiles also invited viewers to interact with it, but in a simpler, more physical, fun way.But IAF had to postpone to next year a big-ticket new media artwork by Daniel Buren. The renowned French conceptual artist had devised a large-scale installation for the facade of the IAF tent using light technology in such a way that tent would seem to change colour through the day with the changing light of the sun. But it couldn't be installed because of technical problems; so the facade was be bare this year, unlike other years, when it has been the site of commissioned art-works.
Indian art audiences were more familiar with installations such as Paresh Maity's 'Procession' of 50 large ants and 'Second Skin', Sri Lankan artist Anoli Perreira's woven sculpture hanging from the wall like a spider's web. Veer Mushi's installation of a traditional Kashmiri house toppled as if by the recent floods, makes a more touching statement, especially the numerous small portraits of survivors inside and a video projection.Then there was Vishal K Dar's 'Prajapati', a light sculpture that illuminates otherwise absent from public view eminent Italian artist Francisco Clemente's painted Jodhpur tent, and a rather evocative work called 'Fungus' by Polish artist Krystian Truth Czaplicki, which consists, literally, of fungus like outgrowths on the wall of brick structure.
Well-known architect, designer art collector and DNA columnist Ashiesh Shah curated 'Chand LC', short for Chandigarh Le Corbusier, which, for some reason, will be shown at the IAF's closing party today. The show pays homage to Corbusier through never-before-seen drawings, photographs and furniture, loaned from the private collection, largely 92-year-old M.N. Sharma. The first Indian chief architect of Chandigarh, Le Corbusier's junior associate and now the last surviving member of his team, Sharma has taken it upon himself to save the heritage of Chandigarh and the legacy of his mentor.
