What is the documentary about?The film is an attempt to understand the worlds of the autistic- to become aware of their inability to socialise and communicate with the world, followed by their own frustration and the frustration of the people that live with them. There are 16-18 behaviours typical of the autistic and if a child has about 6-8 of them he can be considered autistic. The film showcases the parents' experience of dealing with a child who is autistic- the discovery of late milestones, no proper guidance from doctors, all kinds of misleading expensive tests and therapies, prayers and pilgrimages, rejection in normal schools and finally finding the right special school. The trauma of living in this situation, where their child is shunned by society, takes a toll on their relationship and creates, most often, distance between them and family members and society.
What are the revelations shown in the film?I was very much shocked while talking to doctors and parents of kids with autism. Many doctors get away with the excuse that the MBBS course does not teach them about autism. Some doctors advise sedation to reduce hyperactivity, which does not really help. They even give shock treatment which renders the kids life-less. There is need for awareness about this disorder. Health ministry should conduct a sensitisation lecture for all the doctors. The government should take up this issue immediately.
Why did you choose Autism as the subject for your documentary?For the past few years I have been working with the S P J Sadhna school, which works in this field. This school also requested me to make a documentary on this subject. Autism is not a disease nor is it a mental illness. While doing research and talking to parents, special educators and schools, I felt a sense of urgency to bring this film out to people – to create awareness in society which alienates and shuns the autistic.
What needs to be done?The government should play a major role to help these children. Children with Autism need a government hospital certificate to certify their medical condition. But I find that these children normally can't keep quiet for two hours in school. Yet, in order to be certified, they have to shuttle between hospital departments for evaluation. The government should house all the specialities in one place and evaluate the child there and then, and issue the certificate. Every medical college should celebrate World Autism Day in the hospital and college campus so that students, doctors and visitors become aware of this subject.
