We must get out of the negative mindset of wailing about lack of awareness, the crippling social stigma and so on. Yes, these issues are real, as is the glaring lack of Psychiatrists in our country (less than four thousand for 70 million affected by serious mental illnesses!).
So, let's imagine we had a Ministry for mental health and I was made in charge of it. What would I do with this position of power and responsibility?
Create a central think-tank involving leading Hospitals, Psychiatrists, Psychologists, Philanthropists, Physicians, Holistic Healing Experts, noted Thought Leaders, Media and NGO's. All plans and action must stem from here.
— Incentivise Pharmaceutical companies investment in awareness campaigns. In fact, I would pursuade them to reserve a portion of their CSR spends (mandated Corporate Social Responsibility) for this specific purpose.
— Create Public Awareness Media campaigns for TV and Radio. Engage a leading star such as Deepika Padukone, who already has a stake in the cause through her organisation, for this campaign.
— Hold Seminars for creating Awareness on key days at Public Hospitals.
— Multilingual support on websites and 24/7 Support on telephone helplines in all important languages. This could address issues such as suicide prevention (an epidemic!), addressing doubts, providing information about nearest treatment facility, etc.
We have so many campaigns for creating awareness and sensitising people about diseases such as Tuberculosis. Similar mass campaigns will be conducted for educating people and dispelling myths and doubts. Stigma exists because of ignorance and the understandable diffidence of those suffering. Only light can dispel darkness. Awareness and sensitisation have the power to fade stigma into insignificance.
Awareness and Stigma are one aspect, treatment a different one altogether. Long-term solutions, such as encouraging more people to choose Psychiatry as a profession, would take years to implement and show results. What can be done in the interim is:
The typical family physician is ill-equipped to diagnose, let alone treat mental illnesses such as bipolar disorder, OCD or schizophrenia. How about updating them with at least the basic information about these and other mental illnesses? This ensures that a major illness is nipped in bud and the patient can then seek appropriate treatment from a Psychiatrist. Believe me, this might be a game changer. My own physician mistook my bipolar moods to be depression and his treatment by anti-depressants triggered mania which resulted in my hospitalisation. (I don't blame him at all, even today there is not enough knowledge about these illnesses, so you can imagine what it was like in 2002!).  
Similarly, every Primary Health Care Centre, especially in remote villages of the country could have at least one medical professional who is similarly trained to diagnose mental illness.
Similar bodies to be created at State, District and Panchayat level. In fact, to catalyse them into action, institute an award for the model state, district and panchayat each year. If a deadly disease like Polio could be eradicated, nothing can be too daunting. Encourage industrial houses, known to be generous, to adopt their own villages or districts and fund activities there.
Why not make mental health a part of the high school and University curriculums? Optional subject could be a way, and much more detailed study compulsory in the medicine stream. Also, many youngsters are willing volunteers. For a cause of such a nature there would be many helping hands and fresh minds for sure.
Indians have a blessing in the form of the Drugs Price Control Act. Why shouldn't medicines for all mental illnesses be brought under this Act? Firstly, some of the conditions are acute and chronic in nature. In most cases, treatment is required over one's lifetime. Cheaper medicines would bring many under the treatment net and reduce stoppage midway.
When most pre-existing physical illnesses are not excluded from Mediclaim, why this stigma towards mental illness? Yes, mental illness is not covered by even the state insurers, pre-existing or not. The attitude reeks of "Your hefty premium is acceptable, your illness is not!" Firstly, can this be challenged as being a restrictive Trade Practice? Secondly, is this Constitutional at all? This anomaly should be set right straight away because due to this a beaten down person's illness becomes a bigger burden for the family financially.
As you can see, on the first day of taking charge of the new portfolio, this Minister has his hands full! Rubbing my hands with glee in anticipation of the road ahead…
The write is an author, Storytelling & Personal Branding Coach, Mental Wellness Catalyst.
