Prateek (name changed) now makes delicious sandwiches for his peers and was seen playing football with other kids which he was hesitant in doing, only a few months back. He moved to a new school in Class I where he was unable to adjust.
He eventually got labelled as a social outcast and a poor performer in academics in his new school. His intelligence quotient is of a nine-year-old, yet he was being promoted to subsequent classes year-after-year based on the Government’s no-detention policy. The stress of each higher grade he was getting promoted to; resulted in low self-esteem and self-doubt.
Prateek’s father, who earns Rs 12,000 per month, took him to Mind Piper’s clinic at Khadija National Hospital in Daryaganj where he was initially provided pharmacological intervention. There was some improvement in symptoms of depression and aggression, but rest of the concerns remained unchanged.
The mental health professionals at ‘Mind Piper’ introduced Prateek to action-oriented workshops which are conducted by ‘Creativity Adda’.
‘Mind Piper’ is co-founded by Siddhant, Rajiv and Dr SA Basir. This social enterprise operates in the clinical mental health care space and caters to the low-income families in underserved communities by focusing on holistic mental health care, which has a huge stigma attached to it in India.
They have conducted workshops and have been part of seminars in various institutes like Lady Irwin College, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), and engineering colleges in Greater Noida.
“When we assessed Prateek’s situation, we found that he had totally lost his self confidence. He had no friends and was socially isolated in school which led to these intermittent aggressive outbursts,” said Siddhant.
“Moreover, the label of a ‘useless kid’ further led him to lose interest in studies. His current aptitude is that of a second grade student. We realised that he needed a structured intervention at affordable price point,” he added.
This innovative school program supported by the DS Foundation focuses on action learning where training is given in various aspects like cooking, dancing, robotics via action learning. 
“We wanted to make our centres operate in small carpet area to give a cozy, familiar vibe which is a great way to reduce initial patient anxiety,” Siddhant further said.
The programme has seen a massive response from the patients. They also conduct sessions in schools where children are encouraged to speak about their struggles through poetry.
Siddhant is a Fellow of the School for Social Entrepreneurs India, supported by PWC India.
