In a shocking incident that occurred in the Adarsh Nagar area of the city on Friday afternoon, an 8-year-old boy was brutally murdered by a man suffering from mental illness. The man had been brought to Jaipur by his family members from Rewari in Haryana after they observed weird behaviour. Shockingly, the man had entered the house and shouted that he has been possessed and further shouted asking to take out the ghost inside him.
The surprising incident occurred near Mental Hospital at Adarsh Nagar area. “The house where the incident occurred is located adjacent to Agarwal Seva Sadan. The deceased boy has been identified as Aditya, a native of Jhiri village near Thanaghazi town in Alwar district,” said Arun Singh, station house officer, Adarsh Nagar police station.
In the afternoon, Aditya was playing in his maternal uncle’s house. “Aditya’s mother recently got a job as a clerk in the JMC and had moved to Jaipur four days back. In the afternoon, Aditya was at the house while his aunt was washing clothes in one of the bathrooms. While the woman was engrossed in her work, a man suddenly entered their house and started shouting about being possessed by a ghost. The woman got scared over this and closed the gate of the bathroom,” the SHO said.
“Hearing the loud noises, Aditya came to the spot to find out what had happened. However, the man saw the boy and immediately held him by the scruff of the neck and dragged him to another bathroom in the house. On the way to the bathroom, he picked a kitchen knife and Aditya’s throat,” the SHO said.
“As the man came out of the bathroom, he was nabbed by the locals who informed the cops of the incident and immediately a team was dispatched. Upon reaching, the crime scene was investigated and when the man was asked about his identity, he started giving weird answers,” officials said, further adding, “Somehow we found that the man had been brought to the Mental Hospital and his family was found. It was then learned that his original name was Ashish, however, he was sent out of the country for studies and he changed his name to Lawrence. A day before he reached his native home Rewari from Pondicherry and had been acting weird. 
The family then realised that he was unwell and brought him to the hospital for treatment. Once he entered the hospital, he immediately got free of the hold and fled from the spot after which the murder was committed”. Meanwhile, the police have arrested Lawrence and initiated an investigation into the matter.
