Shobha (name changed) had all the trappings of a successful working woman. In her 20s, married to a man she fell in love with, and a job as a professor at a college in Mumbai— she seemed to be on top of her game.
Except, she would frequently lock herself in the washroom while at work or lie on the bed and bawl like a baby. Once done, she would carry on as if nothing had happened.
It was weeks later, when egged on by a colleague who observed her performance at work slipping, that she saw a counsellor. The diagnosis? Clinical depression.
Shobha is not alone. The results of the country’s first National Mental Health Suvey conducted by Bangalore based institute NIMHANS that covered over 10,000 individuals across 12 states found that one in 20 Indians, or about 6 crore, suffers from some form of depression. 
Women across ages, particularly those who are widowed/separated, and men in the age group of 40-49 were found to be the most depressed. And those living in the urban areas were significantly worse off than their rural counterparts.
Given the economic fallout of depression, to individuals, families, even companies, the World Health Organisation too is taking up the subject as the theme for the 2017 World Health Day, that will be marked on April 7. 
In Shobha’s case, the counsellor found she was a victim of emotional and sexual abuse. “It was a case of marital rape,” said Gauri Ambavkar, a counsellor at Dharavi based NGO SNEHA that deals with gender based violence.
But the depression is often the final stage for women who have endured years of abuse— starting with mental and emotional, followed by physical abuse. “A lot of adolescent girls we work with complain about how their access to opportunities are hindered. They are forced into a marriage despite wanting to study more and it builds up over time,” explains Ambavkar. “There are a lot of expectations from women and often little social support,” she added.
The survey found that the number of Indians who are in need of active intervention is as high as 150 million— most of who are unlikely to get any help. With 1% of our population suicidal at any given point in time, the numbers paint a grim picture of mental health in the country.
While India has a huge population that is suffering from depression, it is important to first make the distinction between being sad and being clinically depressed. 
“Depression as an emotion is something we all go through. It is an illness only if the mood is constantly low throughout the day for over two weeks,” explained Dr Lakshmi Vijayakumari, head, Department of Psychiatry at the Voluntary Health Services, Chennai. 
One of her patients described the state as having a black cloud hovering over her head the entire day. Another described it as a feeling similar to having a heavy weight placed on her chest.
More often than not the individual loses interest in everything. “If a person is excited about shopping but not about cooking, that can’t be called as being depressed,” Dr Vijayakumari said. Excess or no sleep, low appetite, guilt over minor things and confusion are some of the symptoms that might accompany depression.
Long neglected, mental illness is being increasingly talked about now. The Mental Health Care Bill that was passed by the Rajya Sabha on August 8 this year seeks to decriminalise suicide— a move that was hailed by healthcare professionals across the country. 
It also gives individuals with mental illnesses access to healthcare and insurance. The Bill, once passed by the Lok Sabha, will replace the Mental Health Act of 1987.  
“Things are definitely changing,” said Dr Soumitra Pathare, Consultant Psychiatrist and Co-ordinator of Centre for Mental Health Law and Policy at the Indian Law Society, Pune. “We need to expedite the change. We talk about TB, malaria and polio because it can cause death but we don’t see depression in the same way,” he added.
Dr Pathare, who was involved in the drafting of the new Bill, says it signals a certain amount of change in our attitude to talk about the subject.  
While 10.6% of the population suffered from some form of mental disorder, those linked to the use of tobacco are the most common, followed by psychoactive drugs and alcohol use disorder.
Alcohol related disorders was found to be 18 times higher in men than women, and this is a conservative estimate given the survey only measured extreme alcohol dependence.
“A lot of this addiction also leads to violence,” said Ambavkar who frequently counsels husbands of domestic violence victims.
While addiction is one part of the story, the body’s own chemical changes also often cause depression. “We already know about post-partum depression that is seen in many women after childbirth and premenstrual dysphoric in which severe depression precedes menstruation,” Dr Vijayakumari says.
When the demographics of the respondents to the survey was studied, men in the age group of 40-49 were found to be as vulnerable as the women and the elderly to be depressed.
“Growing up, men get the message that they have to perform well in whatever they do,” said Harish Sadani, Co-founder and Secretary of Men Against Violence and Abuse (MAVA). “They are taught that masculinity is linked to performance and they bottle up their emotions,” he added. More often than not, it leads to emotional outbursts and violence.
As a gender rights activist, he has been working with both rural and urban men across 8 districts in Maharashtra for over two decades. A key problem, he says, is that the men are not taught how to express themselves properly. 
“When men are in a group they talk but two men don’t share emotions like women do. When it comes to healthy relationships men lag behind,” Sadani said.
Social support is generally the key in helping an individual deal with depression. “It does not mean just talking to one’s neighbour. A support from a family member or friend goes a long way in helping a person recover from depression,” Ambavkar said.
Healthcare professionals are on the frontline but they might not be prepared for the challenge. For example, a patient suffering from depresssion could visit a doctor complaining of anything from headache to chest pain. 
“Patient can be diagnosed if the doctor asks basic 5 to 6 questions and then refer him or her to a psychiatrist,” Hyderabad-based Dr G Prasad Rao, President, Indian Psychiatric Society said. However, doctors need to be properly trained to refer patients to the right system. 
“Around 80-90 of the doctors pass their MBBS exams without adequate knowledge of psychiatry,” points out Dr Rao. 
“There is a need to train doctors in identifying the signs of mental disorders so that they can then refer the patients to psychiatrists,” he added.
This is a crucial gap in the system that would need to be addressed as most often that not depression manifests itself in the form of psychosomatic pain which is linked to psychological causes or triggers.
There is also need for increased funding along with an upgradation of infrastructure. “It won’t just be enough to supply the public system with funds. They also have to be in a position to absorb these funds and put them to use properly,” added Dr Pathare.
Modern drugs have made it easier to combat mental illness, and there are several classes with fewer side-effects that can be used to treat depression. Doctors insist that these are not addictive unless combined with sleeping pills.
“Anti-depressants are not mood elevators. They don’t give you a high, they just help you feel normal,” said Dr Vijayakumari. 
“The good thing is India also has a lot of generic drugs that are cheap compared to the rest of the world,” she said.
What is dangerous though is that many of the drugs are easily available over the counter. Normally doctors prescribe the drugs for a period of 6-8 months to a clinically depressed patient and the dose is gradually tapered off. 
“60% of the patients respond to the drugs in the first four weeks itself,” said Dr Rao, adding that some may have to continue medication for up to two years.
