A 28-year-old woman, a diagnosed schizophrenic, has been accused of fatally attacking her 63-year-old mother in their Virar residence while no one else was at home. Her brother returned in the evening to see the woman sitting beside their unconscious mother and clapping.
Maulika Shah (28), a resident of Meet Vinay Complex in Gokul township of Virar (W), was diagnosed as a schizophrenic at the age of 22 years. She had been taking medication since then, but it was stopped about 3 weeks prior to the incident. Her younger brother, Sagar Shah (25) said that Maulika became more violent after her medication was stopped.
An employee with a firm in Mumbai, Sagar returned home on Wednesday to see his mother, Hasumati, lying in a pool of blood in the hall, and Maulika sitting next to her limp body clapping.
A neighbour, Bhagyawanti Jain illustrated Maulika's violent behaviour by saying: "She once threw a kid down a staircase and had also tried to strangle a woman earlier, who was soon rescued."
Jain added that along with other neighbours, she helped Sagar tie up Maulika, who then defecated in the flat. They rushed the 63-year-old to Sanjivani Hospital in Virar (E), where doctors referred them to Shatabdi Municipal Hospital in Kandivli (W); Hasumati died during treatment there.
Sagar said that after the incident, the police advised his family to get Maulika admitted in Thane Mental Hospital. However, when Maulika was taken there on Saturday, they were turned away, despite having a certificate from the cops.
Sagar added: "We were told that as per law, voluntary admission (in the mental hospital) no longer happens, and they need a court order. So we will do that and go to court on Monday to get a legal order issued."
Gopalkrishnan Aiyer, from Anand Rehabilitation Center in Nalasopara, specialises in handling cases of mental illness. He went to the Shah's residence to see Maulika after the incident, where he said: "She needs urgent treatment. It is a crime to keep a patient tied up for being schizophrenic. The woman has not been looked after by her family, so we will get her admitted for treatment soon."
While a motive was not immediately known, the Arnala Coastal police have registered a case of accidental death in this regard.
