


The Chalet School is a series of approximately sixty school story novels by Elinor M. Brent-Dyer, initially published between 1923 and 1970. The school was initially located in the Austrian Tyrol, before it was moved to Guernsey in 1939 following the rise to power of the Nazi Party, and again to Herefordshire following the Nazi invasion of the Channel Islands. It further moved to a fictional island off the coast of Wales, and finally to Switzerland.[1]

The Chalet School is founded in 1925 by Madge Bettany when her brother has to return to his job in the Forestry Commission in India. She comes to the conclusion that starting a school would be a convenient way to generate some much-needed income, while also looking after her infirm younger sister Joey. Finding that suitable locations in England would be too expensive for her plans, she decides to look abroad, and finally settles on a large chalet in the Austrian Tyrol, conveniently providing a helpful climate for Joey's recuperation. Within a few years a sanatorium is built not far from the school, where tuberculosis patients convalesce. The founder, Dr Jem Russell, along with Dr Jack Maynard, provides assistance to members of the school and the two Doctors eventually marry Madge and Joey respectively. Robin Humphries is also a main character, until she leaves the Chalet school to go to Oxford and later becomes a nun. The books then follow a variety of characters, including Daisy Venables, Bride Bettany and Gay Lambert, until Mary-Lou Trelawney comes to the school, and becomes the main character for several books. After she leaves school, in the later books, Joey's triplets become main characters.

Throughout the series, various girls arrive at the school with personal problems, bad attitudes or behavioural issues. As a result of the ministrations of better-behaved classmates and the school mistresses, they tend to discover the error of their ways and become model pupils.  This formula of a troublesome new girl who reforms and conforms is most common in the later books.

Chalet School books were originally published in hardback between 1925 and 1970 by W. & R. Chambers.[2]

The novels were reissued in paperback format between 1967 and 1995. Usually with updated language. Some were more or less uncut, but many others were abridged to various extents, including chapters deleted from some titles. A few were split into two paperback volumes, and several were retitled.[3]

Many authors have written books set in the Chalet School universe. Some of them follow on from the last book of the series, and others attempt to fill in some of the "gaps" in the earlier years of the school.  All books are published by Girls Gone By Publishers (formerly Friends of the Chalet School) unless otherwise stated.

This title describes the events which led to the founding of the Chalet School.

This list contains all fill ins that have been published that fit within the time-scale of the Chalet School universe written by Elinor Brent-Dyer (i.e. not preceding or following it). The second title listed is the book that immediately precedes the respective fill in unless otherwise stated.

The first book follows some of the Chalet School characters, though it is not set in the School itself. It is not recommended for younger readers.

These books follow on after Prefects of the Chalet School

