


Jason Alan Bradbury (born 10 April 1969) is an English television presenter and children's author, best known for presenting shows such as the Channel 5 technology programme The Gadget Show and the BBC One game show Don't Scare the Hare. In 2016, Bradbury presented several rounds of the Tour Series cycling competition for ITV4.

His first book, Dot Robot, was published on 5 February 2009 and his second novel in the Dot Robot series of techno-thrillers, Atomic Swarm, was published on 1 February 2010. The third book, Cyber Gold was published on 7 April 2011.

He is on the judging panels for the BAFTA Video Games Awards and the Media Guardian Innovation Awards.

Bradbury's first ever television show was a cable show called Tellywest, where he worked alongside Sacha Baron Cohen. He has also hosted shows on Bravo (UK TV channel) including Mercenaries in 2001/2002 (later repeated on the Virgin Channel some years later), and also on Trouble TV including T Spot, Trouble @ Breakfast, Jason On Your Doorstop and Trouble Radio. He was also a presenter for BBC Knowledge's Front Room

On The Gadget Show, Bradbury regularly visits universities, laboratories and research and development departments to see future science and technology. He is known for his exotic DIY gadget builds, which have included a DIY hoverboard, the world's first 'phone glove', a Head-Up Display for his girlfriend's car, and a "mind-reading" device made from a modified mouse that (crudely) controlled a computer.[1] He also built his own hovercraft using only a car wheel and an industrial sized fan. On one of the gadget show episodes Suzi Perry tries to rid him of his "addiction" as a fanboy to Apple products but fails when it comes to his Macbook.

Bradbury was the last original presenter until he announced he will be leaving the show at the end of 2016.

Jason was the host of the primetime BBC One game show Don't Scare the Hare which made its debut on 23 April 2011. The show was presented by Jason and narrated by Sue Perkins, and was scheduled to run for 9 episodes (including a compilation show), however it was axed after just a few episodes due to poor ratings.

Bradbury hosts the Channel 5 show Motor Morphers which made its debut on 6 May 2013. In it, two teams are tasked with converting an old vehicle each into something different, which they then pit against each other to see whose is best. The programme was broadcast for 4 episodes.

Bradbury has written a series of techno-thrillers for 8 to 13 year olds called Dot Robot. The first in the trilogy, Dot Robot, tells the story of a twelve-year-old mathematics and computer gaming genius, recruited into a top-secret robot defence-force. He has also been touring schools in the UK since publication of the series with an interactive robot experience called  The Dot Robot Roadshow. His second book Atomic Swarm, was published by Puffin on 1 February 2010 and the last in the trilogy, Cyber Gold, was published on 7 April 2011.

Bradbury was born in Birmingham but grew up in Lincolnshire, attending New York, Lincolnshire Primary School and Gartree Community School. He later moved to London. Bradbury has a wife whom he married on 8 April 2012 and three children.[citation needed] He is also a very active Twitter user with over 450,000 'followers'.[2] Bradbury also has a private pilot's licence and holds a UK radio amateur licence with callsign 2E0JAB.

