Students from the Socially Backward Category (SBC) of SIES Graduate School of Technology (GST), Nerul, submitted a written complaint to Nerul Police against a college for refusing to forward their exam forms to the Mumbai University (MU) for not paying the post-dated cheque of annual fees. The college asked students to pay an annual fee of Rs 1.2 lakh this year as the Social Welfare Department (SWD) did not pay scholarship fee of students since 2014.
More than 30 students of SIES (GST), an engineering college, are in a fix. Half of them were denied exam forms to appear for the upcoming final year exam. The other half did not receive their original documents from the college after passing out. All this happened because the SWD of the state government had not paid their scholarship fees since 2014 to the college SBC students pursuing Printing and Packaging Technology (PPT) course.
The college later decided to fill the forms of the students for upcoming final year exams and even asked to pay some fees with an undertaking from the students. But suddenly the college refused to forward the exam forms of students as they did not receive the post-dated cheque from students of annual fees along with undertaking.
One of the final year students said, "We filled the forms for an exam and also paid some fees to college which got recently hiked by fee regulatory authority. But the college refuses to forward our forms to MU because we did not give them the post-dated cheque of a remaining amount of annual fees. The college has decided to incurred whole annual fees from us if they fail to get scholarship fees from SWD. Hence we students wrote a letter to Nerul police to get help."
Rajendra Chavan, Senior Police Inspector, Nerul Police station, said, "We received a written complaint by students over the scholarship fee issue. We had called the principal of the college and after the discussion, it will be decided what needs to be done."
Vikram Patil, principal of College, said, "Students have not given post-dated cheque of scholarship hence we did not send their exam forms to MU. We asked that fees because we are not sure to get scholarship fees from SWD. I will give a report of police visit today and management will decide further what to do."
