The bodies of four siblings — three sisters and their brother — were found hanging from the ceiling of their house in Faridabad on Saturday morning. The police have recovered a suicide note, in which they have blamed financial woes and the recent deaths of their mother and a younger brother as reasons for taking the extreme step.
The deceased have been identified as Meena Mathews (41), Beena Mathews (40), Pradeep Mathews (38) and Jaya Mathews (39). Locals said the bodies were discovered on Saturday morning at around 7.30 am. An alarm was raised, and as people began peeping into the ground floor house in Aman Apartments, they realised all windows were drawn and doors were shut.
"The living room had a cooler placed by the window. We moved it and peeped inside, and saw two women were hanging from the ceiling fans. One of us rushed to the police station," said Rajkumar, the building caretaker.
The bedroom of the house had 39-year-old Jaya hanging from the ceiling fan, while Meena and Beena were hanging from the ceiling fans in the living room. Pradeep's body was recovered from another bedroom, which had its own entrance. Each room had a picture of Jesus Christ.
In the living room was present a bed, which cops claimed, was used by the youngest brother Sanju who died in September. Sanju had met with an accident and was bedridden for about two months before he passed away. The living room also had space for worshipping and a small attached kitchen. A framed photo of their parents was also seen in the living room.
Forensic experts and crime teams were called to the spot to collect samples. All four bodies were found hanging with the help of nylon ropes. The ropes were cut down, and all four were sent to PGI Rohtak for a post-mortem examination.
"We have recovered a suicide note from the spot, dated October 18, in which they have written that they were deeply saddened by the deaths of their parents and younger brother," said Vishal Kumar, station house officer of the Surajkund police station.
Father JJ Mathews died in April this year, followed by mother Agnes, who died in July. Younger brother Sanju was bed-ridden for two months, before succumbing to wounds suffered in an accident
