Nearly two years after Jaish-e-Mohammed terrorists killed seven soldiers in an Army camp in Nagrota of Jammu and Kashmir, the National Investigation Agency on Saturday arrested a key accused when he was trying to flee to Saudi Arabia.
Mohammad Ashraf Khandey of Achhan village in Pulwama district was picked from the Indira Gandhi International Airport in New Delhi. Khandey, who was on the run, had planned to move to the Gulf nation via Sri Lanka, said officials.
According to the NIA, Khandey was a co-conspirator in facilitating, harbouring and transporting the JeM men. The Pakistan-based terror outfit was founded by Masood Azhar, who was freed by India in 1999 in exchange for passengers on board the hijacked Indian Airlines flight IC814 that had been taken to Kandahar in Afghanistan.
On November 29, 2016, three heavily armed JeM fidayeens donning police uniforms stormed the highly fortified camp of 166 Medium Regiment Camp near 16 Corps headquarters and killed seven soldiers, including two officers, at Nagrota on the Jammu-Srinagar National Highway.
Security forces gunned down the terrorists in a daylong fight. Sixteen hostages, including 12 soldiers, two women and as many kids, were rescued by the Army. It was found that the JeM attackers had infiltrated into India through the International Border in Kathua-Samba sector in the intervening night of November 27 and 28, 2016.
"A well-planned conspiracy was unearthed and a network of Over Ground Workers of Jaish-e-Mohammad was busted which was responsible in facilitating this attack. Three accused Sayeed Munir-ul-Hassan Qadri, Tariq Ahmed Dar and Mohammad Ashiq Baba have already been arrested in the case and they are presently in judicial custody," said the agency in a statement.
NIA said the investigation has established the role of all the accused in providing shelter and transportation to the terrorists on the directions of their Pakistan-based handlers. The statement added, "Investigation of the case is in final stages and a charge sheet will be filed in the court in the coming days."

