Three terrorists were gunned down in an encounter in Jammu and Kashmir’s Kulgam town on Sunday.
The identity of the terrorists is yet to be ascertained. Giving the details about the security operation, DGP Dilbag Singh said, ‘The encounter concluded just now and I have been told that three terrorists were neutralised in it. The operation is being wound up.’
The encounter broke out between terrorists and security forces in Kulgam’s Larro area in early morning hours. 
A cordon and search operation was launched in the Laroo area in south Kashmir this morning following specific information about the presence of terrorists in the area, a police official said.
Forces were conducting searches, when the terrorists fired on them, and an encounter broke out.
The fierce gunfight ensued in which three terrorists were killed. There are reports that two jawans were also injured during the operation. 
The gun battle comes a day after the National Investigation Agency arrested a key the Nagarkota attack. Mohammad Ashraf Khandey of Achhan village in Pulwama district was picked from the Indira Gandhi International Airport in New Delhi. Khandey, who was on the run, had planned to move to Saudi Arabia via Sri Lanka, said officials. In 2016, Jaish-e-Mohammed terrorists had killed seven soldiers in an Army camp in Nagrota of Jammu and Kashmir. 
According to the NIA, Khandey was a co-conspirator in facilitating, harbouring and transporting the JeM men. The Pakistan-based terror outfit was founded by Masood Azhar, who was freed by India in 1999 in exchange for passengers on board the hijacked Indian Airlines flight IC814 that had been taken to Kandahar in Afghanistan.
Security forces had gunned down the terrorists in a daylong fight. Sixteen hostages, including 12 soldiers, two women and as many kids, were rescued by the Army. It was found that the JeM attackers had infiltrated into India through the International Border in Kathua-Samba sector in the intervening night of November 27 and 28, 2016.
(With agency inputs)
