Families and relatives Saturday bid an emotional goodbye to 39 of the 59 people killed in the tragic train accident here that has sent shock waves across the country.
The mortal remains were consigned to flames at different cremation grounds here as heartbroken friends and family members of the deceased wept inconsolably, not ready to believe their loved ones were no more.
Some of the tragedy-struck women fainted at the cremation grounds when the funeral pyres of their relatives were lit.
Parents of the children killed in the accident broke down several times.
Davinder found it really hard to come to terms with his brother's death.
Several members of his family, hailing from Bihar, were killed in the horrific accident.
At least 59 people were killed on Friday evening after a crowd of Dussehra revellers that had spilled onto railway tracks while watching the burning of a Ravana effigy was run over by a train near Joda Phatak.
Additional Deputy Commissioner Sandip Rishi said 31 bodies were cremated at the Durgiana Mandir's cremation ground. The mortal remains of five people were consigned to flames at the crematorium in the Mohkampura area. 
Rishi said four bodies were taken to Uttar Pradesh for the final rites, while three bodies kept in the mortuary would be cremated later.
Shiromani Akali Dal Badal chief Sukhbir Badal and former ministers Bikram Majithia and Daljit Singh Cheema attended the cremation ceremony at the Durgiana Mandir's cremation ground. 
Meanwhile, Punjab Chief Minister Amarinder Singh has directed Home Secretary N S Kalsi to prepare detailed guidelines for holding religious and social congregations in the state in order to prevent any tragedy.
The directives were issued a day after at least 59 people were killed after a crowd of Dussehra revellers that had spilled onto railway tracks while watching the burning of a Ravana effigy was run over by a train near Joda Phatak here.
The guidelines should clearly define the rules and regulations for holding such events/gatherings in any part of the state on any occasion, as per the directives issued by the chief minister, an official statement said here.
Singh has also asked the home secretary to issue an immediate advisory for sale and storage of crackers during Diwali to ensure strict adherence to the safety rules and guidelines for the same.
Taking serious note of the Amritsar train tragedy, the chief minister made it clear that no laxity would be tolerated in these matters.
While the culpability in Friday's tragic incident would be fixed, it was imperative to ensure that such an incident was not repeated, he said. 
