The Rajasthan unit of the BJP is planning to drop a large chunk of its sitting legislators, find new faces for the upcoming Assembly elections in the state. With this decision, a queer situation is being witnessed where several young guns are fighting their mentors and gurus, whom they have aided for years, for tickets to their seats.
The face-off between gurus and the pupils is being seen across divisions in Rajasthan, Jaipur being the most evident one where there is a beeline for ticket in city constituencies. According to a party office bearer, tickets are being denied to at least 50 per cent (80 of sitting 160 MLAs) to mitigate anti-incumbency and rope in fresh blood to infuse the party campaign with energy.
"These MLAs will be replaced by new faces. That is why hundreds of BJP workers in the state are demanding tickets, many of them were groomed by these very legislators," a party member said. There are workers who have learned the ABC of politics from these legislators and have worked with them for several years as a disciple. Now, these workers aspire to become legislators, the official added.
The Jaipur seats where party workers and youth leaders are demanding tickets against the sitting legislators are: Malviya Nagar, Sanganer, Adarsh Nagar, Hawa Mahal and Civil Lines Assembly constituency.
Councillor Ashok Garg is demanding ticket against Malviya Nagar legislator and medical and health minister Kalicharan Saraf. Garg has been a long time colleague and aide of Saraf. "Garg had handled the election management of Saraf during Assembly elections until now. He has been with Saraf for nearly 40 years," a minister's aide said.
Like Garg, Deputy Mayor Manoj Bharadwaj is a ticket aspirant against BJP legislator Surendra Pareek from Hawa Mahal assembly constituency. Bharadwaj is considered close to Pareek and Pareek is believed to have helped in Bharadwaj's elevation to the post of Jaipur mayor's deputy.
In Sanganer, councillor Vishnu Lata is seeking ticket against two of his gurus. He was groomed as a BJP leader by MLA Ghanshyam Tiwari who has now rebelled against the BJP and has floated his own party. Tiwari is to contest the polls from Sanganer, from where he won as a MLA in last elections. Lata had left Tiwari and joined hands with Jaipur MP Ramcharan Bohra. Lata had campaigned for Bohra during the 2014 general elections. Bohra is demanding ticket from Sanganer constituency this time. Lata is presenting his own claim against Bohra from the same constituency.
Former councillor Kulwant Singh is a claimant against former state president Ashok Parnami in the Adarsh Nagar constituency, while Govind Agarwal and Dinesh Saini are demanding ticket against Social Justice and Empowerment Minister Arun Chaturvedi from the Civil Lines area.
The Rajasthan unit of the BJP has decided to drop a large chunk of its sitting legislators, find new faces for the upcoming Assembly elections to mitigate anti-incumbency factor.
