BJP passed the first major test after pulling out of the PDP-led coalition when it emerged as the single largest party winning 312 wards in all the 22 districts of Jammu and Kashmir on Saturday. It also included 76 wards, which were won uncontested by BJP candidates in the Valley.
Congress won 267 wards in the state, with 78 wards unopposed. Independents emerged as the biggest group in the polls, winning 363 wards across J&K.
In Jammu, BJP won 212 out of the 520 wards. Congress came second, winning 110. Independents won 185 and the National Panthers Party won 13. The saffron party also secured majority in the 11 municipal bodies, of the 36, in Jammu. Congress won three and Independents and others are holding the sway on the rest.
Congress, which had reluctantly joined the electoral fray, won 16 wards in the 74-member Srinagar Municipal Corporation (SMC) elections. It also won 157 wards in Kashmir and Ladakh region, followed by BJP, which managed to win 100. Independents won 178 wards while JDU won one seat in the Valley.
The Rahul Gandhi-led party also swept both Leh and Kargil districts of Ladakh division and emerged as the single largest party in the Kashmir region.
Independents, backed by Peoples Conference led by separatist turned MLA Sajad Lone, won in Handwara and Kupwara besides other towns.
"I had earlier mentioned that we don't have a common symbol allotted to us. That is the reason our candidates are shown as independents. We have taken six towns and are sure of getting the mayoral position in Srinagar," Lone tweeted on Saturday.
"Let me tell you that the next chief minister of Jammu and Kashmir will be from BJP," said Ravinder Raina, BJP state chief, after the Municipal polls victory.
After the results were announced, Congress extended a hand of friendship to all groups willing to stop the communal forces. "Congress is ready to go with any group or embrace any group which has stood tall to stop the communal forces," said GA Mir, state Congress president.
Mir also reached out to the Independents of Srinagar Municipal Corporation seeking their support for the post of Mayor.
"Independents are from various groups and various thoughts. My appeal to all candidates who have won in Srinagar is to come with Congress so that we are able to get a Mayor with secular credentials," he added.
The elections threw both surprises and upsets. BJP candidate from Ward Number 74 of SMC, Bashir Ahmad Mir, got eight votes out of the nine votes. The ward has over 5,000 electorates.
Similarly, an Independent from Ward No 49 Safakadal, Shazia Rashid, got two votes out of three. The ward has over 9,000 electorate. Former terrorist commander-turned BJP candidate Mohommad Farooq Khan, who was contesting Ward Number 33 Tankipora on a BJP ticket, was able to bag four votes.
The biggest upset was the loss of Asifa Tariq Karra, wife of Congress Working Committee member and former PDP MP from Srinagar Tariq Hamid Karra, from Ward Number 31 Laway Pora. Karra, former J&K finance minister, had left PDP in protest against killings during the 2016 unrest and had joined Congress.
The urban local bodies witnessed a cumulative poll percentage of 35.1 per cent in all four phases of polling from October 8 to 16 in the state. Kashmir valley, however, witnessed an extremely low turnout in all the four phases of polls.
The National Conference, PDP, CPIM and others had boycotted the Municipal and Panchayat polls over the issue of Article 35A. However, Congress and Peoples Conference had participated.
