Actor-turned-politician Rajinikanth on Saturday extended support to the #MeToo movement, but cautioned against its misuse.
"MeToo is a good movement, but women should not misuse it... MeToo should be used correctly," Rajinikanth told reporters at Chennai airport this morning when asked for his comments on it.
The actor landed at Chennai airport after wrapping up the shoot for his upcoming film Petta in Varanasi.
On the sexual harassment allegation of singer Chinmayi Sripaada against award-winning Tamil lyricist R Vairamuthu, Rajinikanth said the latter had denied the charges. "Vairamuthu has already refuted the allegations, right? He had asked Chinmayi to approach the court and that he was ready to face it," he said.
Sripaada has accused Vairamuthu of harassing her when she was in Switzerland with him at an event. However, Vairamuthu had denied all allegations against him.
Asked about the Supreme Court verdict allowing women of menstruating age to Sabarimala temple and the standoff in Kerala between devotees and the government, he said: "We should respect the Supreme Court's verdict. But we should also consider the customs and traditions of the temples and respect them as well. It is my humble request."
Rajinikanth also denied rumours that he would launch his party on December 12, his birthday. "I won't be launching my party on December 12, but close to 90 per cent of the work has been completed. I will announce the name of the party and other things at the right time and place." Regarding the 2019 Lok Sabha elections, he added, "You will get to know my stand when the election dates are announced."
'Rajini Makkal Mandram', the precursor of the political party, has created waves in the last few days after members of the group stuck posters across the city. Speculation has been rife that the actor would launch his party soon.
We should respect the Supreme Court’s verdict. But we should also consider the customs and traditions of the temples and respect them as well. It is my humble request, said the superstar.
