The Mumbai District AIDS Control Society (MDACS) has decided to come up with a mobile van in order to detect HIV AIDS infected cases at an early stage. The major focus will be given to slum pocket areas of the city like Mankhurd, Govandi, Andheri East where more migrated population is found in the slum.
The mobile van will be started from Monday, October 22. Speaking about the objective, Additional project director of MDACS, Dr Shrikala Acharya, said, "The mobile van will be operated in the narrow bylanes of the slum areas across the city. We have been getting more HIV positive cases from the slum areas of the city. The migrant people in the slum themselves don't visit the hospitals for the testing. To get early detection cases for treatment, we want to reach out to them and make them aware at the grass-root level."
"Approximately 25 camps will be conducted every month which will be reached out to around seven to eight lakhs population in the city. Areas where we have found high-transmission of the disease will be given more priority. Few of the areas in the city where cases are found more includes - Mankhurd, Govandi, Andheri East, Malad to Dahisar area, where slum population is more, as well as they, are a more migrant population in those slums," Dr Acharya.
While the MDACS already have three mobile buses which were funded by the National AIDS Control Organisation (NACO) in 2008 but are not in good functional condition. They cannot be used for long-distance travel in the city because of the poor condition. Few of the time, the camps get cancel due to non-functioning of the buses.
MDACS has been conducting testing camps in the slum areas of the city every month. She further added, "This mobile van has three cabins where doctors can counsel the patients, blood testing can be done on the spot. Through this, we will reach inside the narrow lanes of the slums."
In order to detect HIV AIDS infected cases, major focus will be given to slum pocket areas of the city like Mankhurd, Govandi, Andheri East where more migrated population is found
