The Shiv Sena's charge on Ayodhya will have members of the influential Warkari sect as its foot soldiers. Shiv Sena president Uddhav Thackeray is due to visit the temple town on November 25 to "remind" Prime Minister Narendra Modi about the promise to construct the Ram temple. The visit will also see pontiffs of religious orders express their support for the cause, pitching the Sena president as a pan-India Hindutva leader.
Speaking at his Dusshera rally on Thursday, Uddhav had criticised the BJP for its failure to ensure a temple for Lord Ram at the disputed site and warned that if the Centre did not comply, the Shiv Sena would launch its construction.
The Shiv Sena, which is looking to expand beyond Maharashtra and also seize the BJP's pan-India hardline Hindutva agenda, holds that since the Ram Temple is a matter of faith, the Centre must legislate its construction instead of letting the courts decide the dispute.
Party's north India in-charge Vinay Shukla said, Warkaris from Maharashtra had supported the Sena's stance and would come to Ayodhya for Uddhav's rally. "Sadhus and saints have also contacted us stating that they want to meet Uddhavji. They say that as Balasaheb's (Shiv Sena supremo late Bal Thackeray) son, he will ensure that a temple is built and not cheat them like the BJP has," he added, stating that Shiv Sena MPs, legislators and office-bearers, including those from north would also be present.
The 13th century Warkari sect, which worships Pandharpur's Lord Vithoba, has its influence across caste lines in Maharashtra and surrounding states like Karnataka. In the past, the Warkaris have forced the scrapping of a proposed Dow Chemicals facility at Chakan near Pune on the grounds that the chemical discharge may pollute the sacred Indrayani river and also affect the pilgrimage centres of Dehu and Alandi located in the vicinity. They also made writer Anand Yadav resign as the president of the Marathi literary meet after a controversy over references to poet-saint Tukaram in his novel.
The Shiv Sena's move to rope in Warkaris with the promise of the Ram Temple will also impact the state's politics. Shuka said Uddhav would pay obeisance to Lord Ram and then address a gathering to be attended by religious heads. Shukla rued that the Ram Lalla was kept under a tarpaulin sheet at Ayodhya and charged that while Modi had never visited Ayodhya after becoming the Prime Minister, a member of the Thackeray family would.
Rameshwar Shashtri Maharaj, founder president of the Warkari Prabhodhan Mahasamiti, said Warkaris across Maharashtra would visit Ayodhya. "The Ram Temple must come up at all costs. It is this issue which propelled Atal Bihari Vajpayee and later Modi to power," he added, lamenting that however, the BJP had dragged its feet on the issue.
"For how many days can Rama stay in exile?" said Shastri, adding that they would support the Shiv Sena. Shastri noted that the Akhil Bharatiya Sant Mahasamiti, of which he is the general secretary, would meet in New Delhi on Sunday to discuss the Temple's construction.

