Just incase people don't know what a metrosexual is! ... These links should help ...     http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=metrosexual   My description: A guy that looks good, takes care of himself and can make a women c*m so hard she can't stand up for 10 minutes ;) ... well that's my experience for the past while a least :)

Chivez got into an accident on the 401 tonight aftering seeing the movie "The Village" ... The OPP officer gave him a ticket :( ... She was a   MILF  and real nice ... we said we would mention her name on the BLOG ... her name was Officer cock motherfucker bitch ass.  At least we have video of someone mooning her ;)  Video of the mooning will be up soon :)

My TiVO is for sale eBay style!      Click Here to BID!

Did you know that KRAFT makes chocolate peanut butter! ... INCREDIBLE! ...   .

What a DAY! ...   A simple DSL install turns into a nightmare today ... takes like 4 hours I "upgrade" to XP Service Pack 2 and it fucks my PC so badly i have to reformat Our PoP in Smithsfalls looses power and the equipment does come back up correctly after the power returns ... and the doors to get in are locked until 9AM tomorrow! ... I would drive out there right now but I gots no keys!  Well ... Put a message on the phone system for customers in that area until I can get ahold of the owner of the building ...   Hope tomorrow is better!

Going to Quebec for the weekend to visit my parents ... Going to shop in downtown Montreal on the way back or maybe goto Bromont and do some biking down the mountain ... dunno yet ... 75 days until I move into my house ...   NOTE TO SELF: Ask the cute girl who works at Hakkim optical out next week ...

I hate BATS ... I mean I really HATE BATS! that's it ...

So the power goes out in town today and I am stuck in a grocery store ... I was in the frozen foods getting some ice cream and I saw the Hungryman ... I though WTF ... Delicious! :) .. well for frozen food at least ...

Woohoo ... My 4 day license suspension is done ... I drove for 4 days + the weekend without a license and never got busted :) ... I am such a rebel ... I saw "Harold and Kumar goto whitecastle" last night ... Kinda stupid but entertaining ...

Didn't do much today ... went for a ride on my bike to kingston with everyone ... went to a car show at blockhouse ... Drank some cool shooters at kelseys and filmed 2 crazy bastards jump off the roof into the pool ... video to follow soon ...   77 days until I move into my house!!

I installed an INJEN CAI on my 2004 TSX .. Sounds very good now ... Check out the video.    http://web.ripnet.com/~mhz/blog/tsx.mpeg

I don't mean to brag but I got a 147 on this IQ Test ;)   http://www.iqtest.com   Funny ... I got 147 but I still can't figure out how to make popcorn without buring it ...

