here's a little of pic of Maria(B#1, Alberto(YBB= yearbook bitch), Mayra (B#2)  

in french class 2004  

Here's another pic of me and maria!! hehe Missing my biscuits a whole bunch. this was taken on halloween 2002..?  

RYLA 2003 Occidental, CA. Nicole, Me, and Ashley  

Look a little blast from the past. It's a pic of me and Debbie. hehe  

Nicole's 18th surprise b-day party!!!  

Here are some pic of come of my favorite asian artists. top three are Jay chou and the bottom left is 5566 and the bottom right is coco lee.       Janice

Hey lookie..It's me and my lil sista kathy. aka burnt brownie. hehe.  

this was when tutu came back from arizona. tutu- doesnt angela looks so enjoyable? tutu- Janice, you look more japanese. hehe. good times.  

this was RYLA 2003 in westminister woods, occidental california. These are pretty much the only asians that were there. *sad face*  

Happy 18th b-day maria!!!!. Edgar, Mayra, Maria, and Me. hehe Eventhough your b-day was like 6 months ago. :P  

here jojo. since you claimed there wasnt a pic of you. hehe.   

Hot Pot city in Richmond with mayra. hehe.   

here's a little something for mayra. remember that cousin that maria was commenting about? well there he is. Name's sammy, alumni of UC Berkeley!  

Debbie and moi, june 3rd 2004. Graduation!!  

debbie, me, tara, and angela.   

Graduation pics  

yay. got it to work...here's our prom pic. hehe. for those that haven't seen it. The theme of the Napa High prom of 2004 was: *Black Tie Affair*. it was on the USS hornet this year, Doesnt mickey look cuuuttee???!! Me= short...*looks down in shame*  good times Janice  

Here's me and my honey's turnabout pic...i cant find my prom pic...maybe just cuz its dumb....or its a diff type of file. Oh wells. Miss you lots honey  

Prom pic from 2003. Debbie, Tutu, me, and friend.  

randy is the one behind me with the colored hair next to the guy with his thumb up. hehe, the one with his head tilted to the side. Intro's: from left to right, Drew(debbie's pledge daddy, ron, rob, ranndy, tim, and jackson). Davis outside of fuji's. 2004  

here's a pic of me and maria  

this is a little something dedicated to my dearest biscuit maria. I know you've been down...But it'll all be better soon. LOOKIE LOOK ITS LEGOLAS!!!  

it's 5566. still searching for their first album. *shakes fist*  

look at susan!!! this is my favorite pic of her so far. She's in MID-AIR!!! it's just funny looking at it. hehe.  

Taebin. Just for you mayra!!!  

Havent posted a pic in a while. Here's a pic of jay chou. New CD came out!!! called: common jasmine orange. (translated).   

here's my mickey doing something silly. notice: he's wearing my purse.:P. we were in berkeley waiting for angela to get back to her place. we were kinda bored. hehe  

me=hyper the night of graduation!:p  

