This is my very first Post. I thought Tripe Soup was a suitable title for a blog and was inspired by my desire to return to Turkey where Tripe Soup (işkender çorbasi) is very popular with the locals.

Leslie Harpold's   Advent Calendar . 25 fun filled Days with surprises

The other night Radio National had Philip Adams interviewing   Daniel Ellsberg  about his book   Secrets: A Memoir of Vietnam and the Pentagon Papers.   Ellsberg made some interesting comparisons between the war in Vietnam and the present conflict in Iraq. Phillip Adams seems to be the number one enemy of the many of Right Wing Australian Blogs on the net.  Most of their readers seem to be Septic Tanks, pretty depressing really.  However found a couple of decent political Aussie blogs which I will read from now on, one being   Tug Boat Potemkin  and even better is   Back Pages  by Christopher Sheil.

An estimated 35,000 people in Indian state of Uttar Pradesh have been declared dead, by unscrupulous relatives, in order to steal their property.    Transparency International  via   The Man in Blue   and more on the living dead   "I'm here. I'm alive," Lal Bihari told revenue officials after discovering he was listed as deceased in 1976. "That may be so," an unruffled clerk replied, "but according to my books you're dead." It took Lal Bihari 18 years to get his life and his land back. During that time, he added the word Mritak, or Dead, to his name and to prove that he was living sought arrest, tried to run for parliament, kidnapped the son of the uncle who had stolen his property, threatened murder, insulted judges, threw leaflets listing his complaints at legislators in the state assembly and demanded a widow's pension for his wife. Each time he was either beaten up by police or rebuked for wasting officials' time. Unable to make headway, Lal Bihari The Dead sought the company of other ghosts in Uttar Pradesh and found an entire underworld of the deceased and dispossessed. Last month a dozen of them demonstrated outside the Uttar Pradesh assembly to publicize their fate, demanding an official investigation into land registry transactions to prevent others from being robbed.   Time Asia

Had one of our first hot days this summer, and I haven't acclimatised yet. Fortunately a cool change is coming tonight. Found this strange little   archive   of machine translated text when I googled term  Hot Adelaide :   When me this thought came, I was even before the carpet seaweeds, which zierte at that time each backyard and thus also our meadow, because she had the function of a backyard, in which one beat out evenly also the carpets of the dwelling. Laying out commodity was likewise not yet invented. Some parents used the Teppichklopfer also for the corporal punishment of their children. That was very painful, but I knew only from an argument with my older brother, with which we had mutually struck ourselves with the Klopfer.    Baghdad Burning  Have been reading the Blog   Baghdad Burning  by a young woman from Iraq. Posts that are  informative about the occupation of Iraq and political situation are mixed with accounts of everyday family life.

Have put togethor a new blog with iblog. the blog is called Zenith Blue (see sidebar)

Extracts from the Odd spot column of   The Age .  Tuesday November 18, 2003 A man's year-old corpse hung for nearly a day in Budapest's Arts University after builders and students mistook it for a modern sculpture. The man hanged himself a year ago but was found only after the closed building was reopened for repairs.   Saturday November 15, 2003 Nazi saboteurs plotted to blow up Buckingham Palace using exploding cans of peas, according to MI5 files just made public. Three men captured in Ireland in 1940 were carrying explosives, including tins labelled "French Peas" containing nitrocellulose.  Friday November 28, 2003 One-third of all American visitors to Scotland believe haggis is a real animal, according to a survey. Almost one in four (23 per cent) of those questioned said they had come to Scotland believing they could hunt and catch Scotland's most famous dish.  which reminds me of something I read recently on   Scottish Food . via   Senior Citizen .

 Apothecary's Drawer  has some links based on popular Victorian fiction. Paul Guinan's   History of Robots in the Victorian Era  is a fascinating site worth exploring. Also has other links about   literary characters  from this period.

Some of my work mates were grieving and/or angry about the untimely   death  of the South Australian Cricketing Great David Hookes. Hookes aggressive batting made him a sporting icon in South Australia and he will be sorely missed. Interestingly I saw in todays   Advertiser  that he was born in Mile End where I presently live.

You are Sylvia Plath - a fiery bombshell with a keen wit, and a gift for lyric poetry.  You will forever alter the literary canon with your mind bending imagery, your sardonic wit, and the mythology you build around yourself.  You are a voice to be reckoned with.       Which Dead Poet Are You?     brought to you by   Quizilla

We do not know where this journey will end. Yet we know this: Human beings are headed into the cosmos.  PRESIDENT George W Bush People tell me the cosmos is near where the Grecians are. The details of George's   vision  look a little dubious:   The proposed funding for the new exploration initiative will total $12 billion over the next five years, with much of it coming from reallocation of $11 billion within NASA's current five-year budget. The president called on Congress to increase the agency's budget by roughly $1 billion spread over the next five years.    If you look at the PDF of the proposed NASA budget (on the same page ) it is hard to determine where the money is coming from to build new spacecraft.

Speaking to British troops in Iraq Tony Blair said:   Brutal and repressive states who because of their brutality or because they don't have the support of their people are developing weapons of distraction and destruction on a massive scale.   via   Radio National

Thanks to Richard (at work) for pointing out this site of oral poet   Benjamin Zephaniah . I like this one.   Wot a Pair   (not published in book form)   "I waz walking down Wye front street When me trousers ran away, I waz feeling incomplete But still me trousers would not stay, When I found where they had gone De pair addressed me rather blunt, And they told me they were sick of being put on Back to front.   I told dem I would treat dem good And wear dem back to back, I promised dem protection From a friend who is a mac, Me trousers did not believe a single word I had to say, And me underpants were laughing When me trousers ran away."

The obsession with National Security in the United States has reached new heights of the ridiculous with   Fish  and   Almanacs  becoming targets for the forces fighting the evils of terror. (  via Presurfer )  While intently watching for suspicious behaviour such as travellers with maps, authorities failed to notice that Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy had crossed the border from those degenerate   Canadians . Looks like its going to be a good year for our struggling beef producers.

My link to Salam Pax  and his co-blogger Raed now seems to take you to a Printer supply company in Argentina. Very weird?  Update  Have now found site with whole   family :   mother: fayza, sons: raed, khaled and majed writing down their diaries. Father: azzam is not interested.

You're  The Guns of August !   by Barbara Tuchman     Though you're interested in war, what you really want to know is what causes war. You're out to expose imperialism, militarism, and nationalism for what they really are. Nevertheless, you're always living in the past and have a hard time dealing with what's going on today. You're also far more focused on Europe than anywhere else in the world. A fitting motto for you might be "Guns do kill, but so can diplomats."      Take the   Book Quiz  at the   Blue Pyramid .    Can't say that I've read the book but I can recommend   A Distant Mirror: The Calamitous Fourteenth Century  by the same Author.

Am subscribing to   Bitterlemons  a website that presents Israeli and Palestinian viewpoints on prominent issues of concern. It focuses on the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and peace process. A related sight is   bitterlemons-international  which covers issues relating to the entier middle east region.

 Bifurcated Rivets  described this site as   Extra-specially weird . After having a detailed look I thought it was not only sad but just a bit frightening.

A history of   movable books  explores the genre of the 'popup' or movable book.  via   Things    

Danish architect Jan Gehl, a guest on   Late Night Live , suggested that Australia could change its Flag (as illustrated) as  Australian   Mary Donaldson  is to marry   Crown Prince Frederik . A better looking Royal couple than Charles and Camilla although I was intrigued by one of the Crown Prince's Titles, the   Knight of the Order of the Elephant .  However a more suitable couple has been travelling through the land in a   Royal carriage .

Your belonging in The Mysteries of Udolpho is quite evident;  a world of intrigue, melancholy, sublimity and terror. You belong where there are danger, gloomy edifices, and evil Italian guardians. Your passion for the passion of the Mediterranean, the divine contemplation of nature, and for adventure stories, makes you a prime contender for a spot in a gothic romance.       Which Classic Novel do You Belong In?     brought to you by   Quizilla

Finally after a long dry spell we are getting some rain tonight. After bit of Googling I discovered the consequences of a   Rainy Day in Adelaide .  "It was a rainy day and there was no rabbit shooting", he said. "The old-fashioned remedy for irresponsible vandalism was a good sound whipping," Mr. Scales replied. He adjourned the case for a week so that the boys could each be given eight strokes of the cane.    Also found this less disturbing   Rainy Day .

 Today Tonight  finally got to air its story on   Trish Draper . The   limits  of her relationship with Derek Sands don't seem match with the line the government are pushing on the requirments for a funded spouse.  There is more about Derek Sands and the Trish Draper affair at   Crikey  who has quite a bit to   say  on the subject.



Thaks to   Evilurl  I now have an evil Url   http://evilurl.com/URINEkillBUSHdie  which points to   http://andyfarnsworth.blogspot.com/  via   Idletype

Full page Ad in   The Australian  today featuring the Senate candidates for   Citizens Electoral Council .  This weird organisation has strong links with the very disturbing Facist Lyndon LaRouche and his bizarre blend of extreme right and left wing   conspiracy theories . More about LaRouche   here .

Dedicated to Romani (Gypsy) culture and history and to extending awareness of the continuous Roma struggle to achieve and maintain dignity and freedom.   Patrin  is a learning resource and information centre about Romani culture, social issues, and current events.     Photos of the   Rrom  people at the site of Photographer Yves Leresche.  While the various tribes of the Rrom originated from India there are people who are known as Gypsies but who are not Rrom. The   Travellers  are of Irish or Scottish stock and speak a  secret  language they have constructed out of Irish English with borrowings from Romany and Irish Gaelic   Many words are alterations of existing words, often backwards spelling, swapped syllables, or at least altered vowels. One word has entered into mainstream English as "moniker" (name, nickname), which came from Shelta _munik_, supposedly a perverse form of Irish _ainm_ "name".   cite     A Vocabulary of Shelta , transcribed from  The Secret Languages of Ireland , by R. A. Stewart Macalister, Cambridge University Press 1937, gives fascinating examples of this little known language.   glodaχ  ‘dirt’, ‘dirty’. That the mīdril may tarsp you, you glodach kriš bʹōrʹ ‘That the devil may kill you, you dirty old woman’ (G); glodach of the tʹera ‘dirt [i.e. ashes] of the fire’. Irish cladach ‘dirty’.   More information on Irish Travellers   here

The Nixons share a laugh with Chou En-lai   More photos of Pat and Dick on their historic visit to China in 1972 can be found at the   Ollie Atkins Photograph Collection

The Rare Books Collection at the National Library of Scotland has Provided an online resource of  broadsides  (broadsheets)   or How Ordinary Scots in bygone days found out what was happening  called   The Word on the Street . You can browse through this collection of nearly 1800 broadsheets under various subject headings   here . Read about   Burke and Hare" , the Irish bodysnatchers and murders, and verse dedicated to one of their victims   Elegiac Lines On the Tragical Murder of Poor Daft Jamie  The pugilistic who favour blood sports may prefer to read an account of the   Battle Between Simon Byrne and Deaf Burke  My favourite so far is   The Life and Strange Adventures of Maragaret M'Donald the Female foot Boy  via   Things Magazine

As the election draws near the weighty political issues of our time come to the fore. Hence this discusion about   flagpoles  at  Back Pages  and then the revival of the Fridge magnet  be alert but not alarmed  campaign. My last   Fridge magnet  was accidently thrown in the bin so I am eagerly awaiting the arrival of its replacement.  For as the Prime Minister has stated   we all have to ensure that this country is as prepared as it can be and as protected as it can be .  While trusting in my fridge magnet to protect me in most circumstances in this age of  hysteria  terror I've decided to do my bit by publishing some useful excerpts from this 1940's Adelaide booklet   Know Your Enemy: and Improvise your own defence   © Department of Home Security, Canberra.  If you need to take shelter and don't want to dig a trench in the backyard;    ... the safest place would be beneath a solid table placed against two walls in a corner of a room. A mattress thrown on the top, as indicated in the accompanying sketch, would increase the protective value of the table, whilst a double thickness of books will also give good protection. If you are caught unawares, why not put a stout table against a wall in the passageway, and block two ends of it with mattresses, or, if you have time, books. It would be much better than nothing.   the booklet also suggests that;   A handy means of boiling the kettle will do much to pass the time away, whilst a gramaphone or portable radio will also do much in that respect.   I suppose you could always read a book, from now on I'm only buying hardcovers for added protection. In the future I will post some useful nutritional advice, such as  The Value of Dripping ,  Do not despise liver   and how to  Preserve a few dozen eggs .

Time for a bit of nostalgia from the late 70's when a  friend at work told me that the Bard of Salford   John Cooper Clark , was still performing. I have reproduced the the lyrics of my favourite JCC work  Beasley street  below since the text of the song at the   JCC site  is almost unreadable. I don't know if the image below is the actual   Beasley street in Manchester , but it was the only one I could find.     Far from the crazy pavements ...the taste of silver spoons A clinical arrangement ...on a dirty afternoon Where the fecal germs of Mr Freud ...are rendered obsolete The legal term is null and void in the case of ... Beasley street  In the cheap seats where murder breeds somebody is out of breath Sleep is a luxury they don't need ... a sneak preview of death Belladonna is your flower Manslaughter is your meat Spend a year in a couple of hours on the edge of Beasley street  Where the action isn't That's where it is State your position Vacancies exist In an X-certificate exercise Ex-servicemen excrete Keith Joseph smiles and a baby dies in a box on Beasley street  From the boarding houses and bedsits full of ...accidents and fleas Somebody gets it Where the missing persons freeze wearing dead men's overcoats You can't see their feet A Riff joint shuts - opens up right down on Beasley street  Cars collide, colours clash Disaster movie stuff For the man with the Fu Manchu moustache revenge is not enough There's a dead canery on a swivel seat there's a rainbow on the road Meanwhile on Beasley Street silence is the code  Hot beneath the collar ...an inspector call Where the perishing stink of squalor  ...impregnates the walls The rats have all got rickets They spit through broken teeth The name of the game is not cricket Caught out on ...Beasley Street  The hipster and his hired hat drive a borrowed car yellow socks and a pink crevat nothing la-di-dah O-A-P Mother-to-be Watch the three-piece suite When shitstopper drains and crocodile skis are seen on ...Beasley Street  The kingdom of the blind ...a one-eyed man is king Beauty problems are redefined ...The doorbells do not ring A light bulb bursts like a blister the only form of heat Where a fellow sells his sister ...down the river on Beasley Street  The boys are on the wagon The girls are on the shelf Their commom problem is ...that they're not someone else The dirt blows out The dust blows in You can't keep it neat It's a fully furnished dustbin ...sixteen Beasley Street  Vince the ageing savage Betrays no kind of life ...but the smell of yesterday's cabbage and the ghost of last year's wife Through a constant haze of deodorant sprays He says ...retreat Alsatians dog the dirty days Down the middle of Beasley street  People turn to poison Quick as lager turns to piss Sweethearts are physically sick Every time they kiss It's a sociologist's paradise Each day repeats Uneasy, cheasy, greasy, queasy ...beastly, Beasley Street  Eyes dead as vicious fish Look around for laughs If I could have just one wish I would be a photograph On a permanent monday morning Get lost or fall asleep When the yellow cats are yawning Around the back of Beasley Street     LYRICS © JOHN COOPER CLARKE   A lot of the old housing in Salford has probably gone now but these   photos by Barry Blitz  capture a feel of the old streetlife and its demolition.

 Wordcraft  a community of linguaphiles has started this epic project, to produce a version of the   Oxford English Dictionary  (OED) in limerick form (OEDILF).  The   OEDILF  project has only started words beginning with   a   at the moment, below are three limericks in the words beginning with   ad  contributed by Bob Hale    With tap dancing a problem is posed Ditto with picking his nose He cannot wear rings Do tip-toes or hand springs He's  adactylous  :- no fingers or toes.  It's wise when telling a fib To be sure, to be clear, to be glib Things only get worse If you fail to rehearse And are forced to rely on  ad-lib   When you move on from just  adolescent  And advance to the stage of pubescent Don't find it surprising If matters arising Have results that are largely tumescent.    via   languagehat  through   metafilter

The Prime Minister, well known impersonator of Max Gilles (pictured above) and fawning admirer of the late Don Brademan, after calling   Muttiah Muralitharan  a chucker, got a right old bollocking in   this article  by Christian Ryan. In the first paragraph Ryan manages to use two of Howards obsessions (Ming and cricket) against him;  Sir Robert Menzies, among his many good turns for Australian cricket through the 1950s and 60s, once paid for a young Keith Stackpole to receive legspin coaching from Clarrie Grimmett. John Howard's one and only contribution has been to put paid to any hope of Muttiah Muralitharan touring Australia. Eight of the lamest, laziest, least considered words uttered by any prime minister on any sport – "they proved it in Perth with that thing" – will go down as Howard's cricketing legacy.  Meanwhile Muralitharan has time for his new role as an    Ambassador  of the United Nations Food Program.

 Boynton  had this fascinating link to an image of   Myrtle Foster batting . A feature of this image was the unusual bat.  The   Worcestershire Women's Cricket  site has a brief history of woman's cricket and this following image.   It seems Woman's Cricket, along with slaughtering some of the local fauna, was quite popular in some parts of Britain among the leisured classes.  From the middle 18th century there are constant press references to women's matches, most of them played, like their male equivalents, in Sussex, Hampshire and Surrey villages. Records also exist for several matches held in Sussex around this time, these were often between rival villages, or teams of married and single women. The winner's prize for such a match might be a barrel of ale or eleven pairs of lace gloves, such games could lure crowds of 2,000 plus and betting on the result was rife.

Have linked to   Hemlock's Diary   "The ravings of Hong Kong's most unpleasant and obnoxious expat" .  The author of this blog sees himself as a modern day   Samuel Pepys , but I'm sure Pepys for all his faults was a much more likable personality. However I have to admit reading the extensive diary of this malevolent misogynist was fascinating. Even If you can't stomach his writing he does have some good links to   Chinese Blogs

Washington Professor of psychiatry Dr. Justin Frank has written a soon to be published book titled   Bush on the Couch: Inside the Mind of the President  In this   publicity blurb  for the book from HarperCollins its claimed that Frank explores:    Bush's false sense of omnipotence, instilled within him during childhood and emboldened by his deep investment in fundamentalist religion   The president's history of untreated alcohol abuse, and the questions it raises about denial, impairment, and the enabling streak in our culture   The growing anecdotal evidence that Bush may suffer from dyslexia, ADHD, and other thought disorders   His comfort living outside the law, defying international law in his presidency as boldly as he once defied DUI statutes and military reporting requirements   His love-hate relationship with his father, and how it triggered a complex and dangerous mix of feelings including yearning, rivalry, anger, and sadism   Bush's rigid and simplistic thought patterns, paranoia, and megalomania -- and how they have driven him to invent adversaries so that he can destroy them  Dr Frank who sounds a bit to Freudian for my tastes could be on to a financial winner here. I can see it now   Blair on the Couch: Inside the Mind of the Prime Minister  via   Juan Cole

from   Nicaraguan Murals  via   Central America and Beyond  through   mango latte . David Holidays   Central America and Beyond  has a number of post discussing Reagan, especially the effect his presidency had on Central America. Also some Reagan Quotes from   Brainyquote     Well, I learned a lot... I went down to Latin America to find out from them and (learn) their views. You'd be surprised. They're all individual countries     Before I refuse to take your questions, I have an opening statement.     I have left orders to be awakened at any time in case of national emergency, even if I'm in a cabinet meeting.

 Double-Tongued Word Wrester  records words as they enter and leave the English language. It focuses upon slang, jargon, and other niche categories which include new, foreign, hybrid, archaic, obsolete, and rare words.   Verwaltungsvereinfachungsmassnahmen  is probably a useful term if you live in Europe, and yes there is a difference between the meaning of   dub  and   dub-dub  via   The Presurfer

Caught somewhere between trying to impersonate Winston Churchill and a Lemming over Britains involvment in Iraq Tony Blair returned from Reagans funeral to find that labour had   lost  nearly 500 seats in Council elections.   The PM, who has been at Ronald Reagan's funeral, urged Labour MPs to hold their nerve amid the anti-war "protest" vote. It was a difficult time and "lessons had to be learned", he said.   Speaking on BBC radio Robin Cook said:   "Out there are a lot of people who withheld their Labour vote because they disagreed with what we did in Iraq. "The tragedy is that hundreds of very good Labour councillors have lost their seats as a result of something which many of them themselves would have opposed. "If we are to win these people back, it's not enough to simply say we are holding our nerve, we are seeing it though,"  At least    Red Ken  Livingstone  managed to scrap back in.  The Governor General manages to sum up Blairs   position .   Update  It seems that Michael Moore now wants to make a   film  about Tony Blair. In regard to Blairs close relationship with Bush:  "Blair knows better. Blair is not an idiot. What is he doing hanging around this guy?" Moore told Reuters.   via   Plasticbag.org

The ABC science show   Catalyst  aired a   story  about Sébastien Murat training to break the free diving record. While I usually find Extreme sports boring and rather silly, there is something about what Sébastien Murat does that transcendes all that.   Sébastien Murat known as “The Human Sub” attempts to break the world record for extreme human breath-hold diving, made famous by the feature film ‘The Big Blue’. In the virtually bottomless waters of Kimbe Bay, on the island of New Britain, Papua New Guinea, he tries to reach an unbelievable depth of 180 metres, without the assistance of any breathing equipment.

Thanks to   Dogfight at Bankstown  (another Adelaide based Blogger) and the Perth based   Spiceblog  for Linking to  Tripe Soup . Have included both these blogs in my links column. Due to the improved changes in Blogger comments are now enabled.

After being held for two and half years in Guantanomo Bay, Adelaide man David Hicks was finally charged by US authorities.  As can be seen in this   ABC Transcript , at least two of the three charges against Hicks look somewhat Dodgy.  Here is a site advocating a   Fair Go For David  Hicks

Watched the  Jim Lehrer Newshour  on SBS this evening and it was fascinating to watch US Attorney General John Ashcroft getting a grilling from the Senate Judiciary Committee about allegations of a memo that suggests the President is not bound by International treaties prohibiting the torture of prisoners. A transcript of the program can be found   here .    Juan Cole  points out that;  A Republican Congress is most unlikely to impeach George W. Bush, even if it does become clear that he is the torturer in chief and that Lynddie England is not the mastermind behind Abu Ghuraib. But he could be prosecuted, even after leaving office, for breaking US law against torture.   American Media Icon Walter Cronkite had   this  to say about Ashcroft last september;  In his two and a half years in office, Attorney General John Ashcroft has earned himself a remarkable distinction as the Torquemada of American law. Tomás de Torquemada, you might recall, was the 15th-century Dominican friar who became the grand inquisitor of the Spanish Inquisition. He was largely responsible for its methods, including torture and the burning of heretics - Muslims in particular.   Ashcroft may be a hero of the Christian Right but he is not supported by   all  christians.

Today the Transit of Venus occurred. Not much to look at I'm afraid. This   Melbourne Observatory  site is worth a look, has information about the 18th and 19th Century Transits of Venus. The   Airy Transit of Venus Simulator  is not as erotic as it sounds.

Ronald Reagan former Actor and US President died today, probably reached the high point of his career with   this . Sadly missed by his family and the   Iron Lady  who once wrote about Reagan that he   "did not suffer from the dismal plague of doubts which has assailed so many politicians in our times and which has rendered them incapable of clear decisions."   A quote which is probably better applied to Thatcher herself. It seems that   CNN  broke the story of Reagans death a little   early .  Update  There was   this   Speaking in London, the Prime Minister, John Howard, described Mr Reagan as the greatest post World War II American leader.  and then   this   "He leaves behind a nation he restored and a world he helped to save," Mr Bush said in Paris.  And all the time I just thought he was an incompetent old bastard who should have been impeached.

The rift between the French and the White House seems to be over with Bush now saying that Chirac is now welcome to   visit his Ranch . What the rabid anti Arab/French contributors to this   site  will make of all this is yet to be seen.

 Jim Kunstler  is an avid commentator on american architecture and society as seen in his   Eyesore of the Month:Architectural blunders in a monthly serial     Kunstlers writing can be quite biting as can be seen in his view of the above   Ontario Art School    a totemized retro-futuroid coffee table joined umbilically to its Soviet-style predecessor below. The message, apparently: art and design are nothing but fun fun fun. Nothing to get serious about. A playful spirit of induced hazard will keep students wondering when the checkered box might wobble free of its cute swizzle-stick legs and come crashing down on their heads. This exercise in hyper-entropic avant garde faggotry is so cutting edge that it is already out of date. The only question: which of the two conjoined buildings is more cruelly ridiculous?   Kunstler dislike of contemporary American society can be seen in this   movie review  of Michael Moores   Fahrenheit 9/11     Michael Moore gives me the chills and the creeps. I see America's future in his ponderous, slovenly, lurching figure, stalking congressmen with his video camera and his childish rhetorical questions. I see a nation of feckless, clueless overfed crybabies building up to tantrum. It will be a long, destructive tantrum with no times-out and it will prevent the nation from getting on with life under the new realities of the 21st century.

A fascinating story via   Dogfight at Bankstown  through   Pharyngula  about the   terror  a woman felt when travelling on a US domestic flight with fourteen Syrian musicians. These musicians were a scary lot, one had a orthopedic shoe and another was carrying a McDonalds bag, and they made frequent trips to the toilet.  This xenophobia shown towards arabic people has become commonplace since 911 as can be seen in the following extract from a report on discrimination against Arab Americans:   A disturbing pattern emerged in the months following September 11 as airline crews and security began to remove passengers of Middle Eastern ethnicity and other people of color from their flights after boarding but before take-off, because some members of the crew or another passenger felt “uncomfortable” with them on board. Once back in the jetway or gate area, security typically would inform the passenger that, “the crew does not feel safe with you onboard,” the only articulated reason for the removal being a “feeling” of discomfort on the part of someone else on the plane. In most cases, this discomfort was attributed to the passenger’s name or perceived ethnicity, since all passengers had, before boarding, successfully passed through at least three levels of security including the Computer Assisted Passenger Screening System (CAPSS) and the FBI watch list .  pp16-17   Report on Hate Crimes and Discrimination against  Arab Americans: The post - September 11 Backlash  September 11, 2001 - October 11, 2002   Also a   story  about a cynical ad run by the Bush campaign that exploits the fear of Arabs (near airports).

  Barista  has a   post  about the conviction of Martha Stewart and then there was the   sad story  about the arrest of Bobby Fischer, another unlikable american. Well do I remember when Bobby took on russian world chess champion Boris Spassky in 1972 at the height of the cold war. This spurred a chess craze at my school, just as Nixons visit to China introduced ping pong as a popular pastime.  Even then I sensed that Bobby really was the  ugly american  as his genius at chess was more than matched by his obnoxious personality. A more detailed article detailing Fischer's decline from American Hero to despised psychotic exile   here .

Due to changes to Blogger have had to move from Mac's Safari Browser to Mozilla's Firefox. At least don't have to use Explorer.

If there is any truth in this Paul McGeough article in the   SMH  then the shit will really hit the fan:       Iyad Allawi, the new Prime Minister of Iraq, pulled a pistol and executed as many as six suspected insurgents at a Baghdad police station, just days before Washington handed control of the country to his interim government, according to two people who allege they witnessed the killings.

A fun little site by   Sirius , live from  Epping Forest ,    Manzill World  is a great read and a good way to flog a few t shirts. Watch out for the Mistle Thrush. via   Sedgwick   Photos by   underbunny  an undertaker at   flickr  the photo hosting site. Seems Underbunny and I share a literary interest in   Mervyn Peake .  via   Barista

searched for entries under  tripe  in   soup tales  and found these lines by Sassoon:   But as he stamped and shivered in the rain, My stale philosophies had served him well; Dreaming about his girl had sent his brain Blanker than ever--she'd no place in Hell.... 'Good God!' he laughed, and slowly filled his pipe, Wondering 'why he always talked such tripe'.  Siegfried Sassoon in  A Subaltern   Siegfried Loraine Sassoon.(1886-1967) was a poet who was deeply affected by his   experiences  in the Great War. In 1917 Sassoon wrote a   statement  against the continuation of the War which resulted in him being hospitalised for shell shock.  This Oxford University Site on   WWI Poetry  has some poems by Sassoon including this one;     Survivors  No doubt they'll soon get well;  the shock and strain Have caused their stammering,  disconnected talk. Of course they're 'longing to go  out again,' — These boys with old, scared faces,  learning to walk. They'll soon forget their haunted  nights; their cowed Subjection to the ghosts of friends who died,— Their dreams that drip with murder; and  they'll be proud Of glorious war that shatter'd all their pride... Men who went out to battle, grim and glad; Children, with eyes that hate you,  broken and mad.   Craiglockhart. October, 1917. Collected Poems 1908-1956, Siegfried Sassoon (Faber and Faber, 1984)

I'm not a big fan of BIg Brother and found the following   quote , in   Soup tales , by the social critic Robert Putnam discussing the trend in voyeur television:  "None of the people watching 'Big Brother' will bring you chicken soup if you get sick."

The recent gaffe by the Murdoch owned   New York Post  when it   broke the story  that Dick Gephardt would be John Kerry's running mate, only to find the following day that it was to be Edwards. May have only been an embarrassment for this Murdoch rag well known  for its comic book style. However another Murdoch rag the   Sun  (UK) has recently reinforced a gaffe from 15 years ago which has cost a lot of money in lost subscriptions.  In 1989 after the Hillsborough Soccer tragedy the  Sun  falsley reported that   ..that Liverpool fans urinated on the rescuers and then stole from the bodies of the victims. This caused local sales of the Sun to collapse. And fifteen years later, the paper's circulation on Merseyside still hasn't recovered.    via Radio National  The   anger  that Liverpudlians hold over this incident has resurfaced when Wayne Rooney, a young star who plays for the Liverpool club Everton, sold his life story to the  Sun  which is engaged in a circulation war with its rival the   Mirror . Another article   here

Also in todays  Age  a nicer story about a refugees   reunion with his cat .

In   The Age  Tony Parkinson in his column entitled    Time will come again to let slip dogs of war   writes that   The growing number of nations pursuing a nuclear weapons program means a pre-emptive military strike such as that in Iraq is inevitable.   In a sneaky bit of hack journalism Parkinson spends half his column discussing remarks by Mohhamed  ElBaradei, the head of the International Atomic Energy Agency.  Evidently ElBaradei argues that in the future    "I believe the Security Council should under certain circumstances authorise pre-emptive measures - collective pre-emptive measures - to address extreme threats to international peace and security, such as to prevent genocide or to counter an imminent threat to use weapons of mass destruction in an act of aggression."   Parkinson ( not ElBaradei) then goes on to link Syria, Libya and Iran to this scenario and concludes    For those tempted to think this whole threat assessment is a beat-up, the hallucinatory fantasy of Washington neo-cons, ElBaradei's warnings constitute an important wake-up call - both on the nature of the risks, and the necessary range of responses that might have to be considered.   The problem is Tony that this whole threat assessment is a   beat up  by Washington neo-cons as can be seen in this post by   Joshua Landis

 Dublin Dictionary : A dictionary of Dublin words and terms. Since a lot of these terms are sent in by readers, don't be surprised if some of these terms are just as likely to be in use other english speaking countries. The Irish Travellers get a mention in this dictionary with entries such as  Knackers ,  Jolliers  and  Nacaragua  all terms which show their marginalisation in Irish society.    Another despised subculture is the  Scanger    an individual of either innercity or Dublin Corporation estate origin, with a liking for acrylic track suits.   also see  anto  or  silkey .     Butt-stroke : When a skanger gives u a mixture of a butt and stroke with his head. also known as a tooth-chipper   Another Dictionary of   everyday english and slang in Ireland       Life in a Travellers' camp , those concrete eating rats are a bit of a worry.

 Mick Fealty's  site   Slugger O'Tool , looks at various strands of political aspects of life in Northern Ireland. Reading the extensive comments in some of the posts, such as this one on   an Orange Order parade which went past a nationalist area , is fascinating.  I suggest drinking a few pints of Guinness while doing so as they can be a long read.   Liked this quote I saw in the comments by  hurdy gurdy man    "Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it."  George Santayana In the paralell universe that is Northern Ireland this maxim becomes inverted - it is those who cannot forget the past that are most wont to repeat it.

A link to   spoons  at   Boynton  revived a childhood memory of the eerie sound of the   saw      Other unusual, ethnic or experimental musical instruments can be found at   Oddmusic.com  Listen to the   Tsabouna  a traditional greek bagpipe that has an ancient history, or the   Hang  which reminds me of a musical wok. Benjamin Franklin invented the   Glass Armonica  in 1761 and Mozart composed two works for it.  Oddmusic also hosts the   Chrysalis Foundation  that;   encourages the creation of new acoustic musical instruments, and supports compositions and performances for these instruments.  through the work of instrument maker Cris Forster. An example of Forsters work is the   Chrysalis  with it evocative sound.

The High Court in a 4-3 finding upheld the Federal Governments right to indefinitely detain failed asylum seekers that have no other place to go. While this decision related to two asylum seekers, stateless Palestinian Ahmed al-Kateb and Iraqi Abbas al Khafaji, there are 13 other asylum seekers who may be affected by this decision.  This ruling overturns previous Federal court rulings which determined that the governments indefinate detention of people who had nowhere to go was illegal. Now these asylum seekers must rely on the mercy of the federal government or hope that a kinder nation (such as New Zealand) will accept them.    Ken Parish  at Troppo Armadillo has a good analysis of this decision and points out that the reasoning of the majority judges in the case of Palestinian was a little bizzare;   it must be accepted in the present appeal that, as the primary judge found, "there is no real likelihood or prospect of [the appellant's] removal in the reasonably foreseeable future", but that does not mean it will never occur. Whether and when it occurs depends largely, if not entirely, upon not only the course of events in the Middle East (his preferred destination being Gaza) but also upon the willingness of other countries to receive stateless Palestinians.     Troppo Armadillo  via   Barista

As the Olympic juggernaut is about to overwhelm us, here is an amusing account of the   1904 St Louis Summer olympics . The Marathon was a particular balls up with the initial winner being disqualified for hitching a lift. The eventual winner was a Thomas Hicks (pictured above) who finished the race in some distress:   It seems that Hicks had begged to lie down about ten miles from the finish line. Instead, his trainers gave him an oral dose of strychnine sulfate mixed into raw egg white to keep him going. This was not enough - they had to give him several more doses, as well as brandy, along the way. By the end of the race, Hicks had to actually be supported by two of his trainers so that he could cross the finish line (essentially, he was carried over the line with his feet moving back-and-forth). Hicks was very close to death's door. It took four doctor's to get him in good enough shape just to leave the grounds, eventually falling asleep on a trolley.   The accounts of other competitors in the Marathon such as the the Cuban Postman and the first two black Africans to compete in the olympics are worth reading. via   Black Triangle

