went swimming for the first time in the pool in our complex today.. the water was really cold at first but after only being out there for about an hour i got tanned! woo hoo!

drove up towards hearst castle on friday.. stopped by santa barbara and had some fish and chips for lunch.. walked around state street.. continued on to san luis obispo.. walked around higuera and had some yummy tri-tip at firestone grill.. bought a book at leon's used books.. had some self-serve fro yo at bali's.. stayed at fireside inn in cambria right across from moonstone beach.. got up next morning and walked along the beach.. had some mexican food in san simeon then took our tour of hearst castle.. searched for chevron gas in downtown cambria.. kept driving up the 1 and saw the scenery around big sur.. watched the sunset in carmel.. had dinner and 2 watermelon/pineapple vodka martinis at hula's in monterey.. drove up to palo alto and had some tea at q-cup.. stayed with my sister.. had dim sum with win , fay, and kelvin at silver lake.. went to q-cup again in cupertino village..  outlet shopping in gilroy.. baby back ribs at applebees.. drove back down the 5 and now we're home! whew! what a great trip :)

    we are happy! really!

we are going to hearst castle tomorrow! wee!

    yum!

why do i keep waking up at 1:30 and then i can't even fall asleep until at least 3am...

yay! fantasia won! i'm so happy!

ddr is the best game ever! maybe i've finally found an exercise plan that i can actually stick with...

i've been playing yahoo games non-stop! someone please make me stop...

just visited san diego.. sushi ota, hawaiian plate lunch... karaoke revolution... salk institute... fun!

hello world... this is my first post on blogger!

    we were at lacma! at night!

    these chicks are sooo cute!

went to a yoga class on tuesday in monrovia.. didn't think much of it but then on wednesday my thighs were so sore! it's much better today though.. last night i made baby back ribs.. they were tender but a little too salty! next time i would definitely put less salt in the dry rub.. also made a pasta salad with corn and tomato which was actually really easy and good.. leaving for sf tomorrow morning bright and early!

started going to 24 hour fitness in west covina last night.. it is much nicer than the one in pasadena downtown (aka the dungeon) and there's about 4x more machines.. the girl that was teaching the "hip hop" class wasn't that good though.. it felt more like aerobics but i guess we did get a good workout.. gonna try out pilates tonight!

i guess it's just june gloom but it's still depressing.. what happened to the sun? i'm glad i at least got to enjoy it this weekend.. yesterday we walked around venice beach and marina del rey.. saw some fishermen along the pier and some surfers.. looks fun! we plan to go back to bike along the ocean path some time soon..

went to fry's yesterday to get some memory for alex's laptop.. the fry's in city of industry is surprising new and non-cheesy.. also got some napkins and gifts at target.. chilled at home reading in-style.. and then went to stone grill for dinner.. finally tried one of their steaks on the hot stone.. yes they put the slab of meat on a piece of really hot stone (much hotter than the sizzling platters) so it cooks while you are eating it  yum .. also had some borscht and ovaltine (instead of horlicks).. then went to speed zone for a few runs at the go-kart track and time crisis 3.. still love that game.. had my apple black tea at tea station with the best pearls.. soft yet chewy and slightly sweet.. too bad the tea kept me up pretty late!

the ajisen ramen in san gabriel finally opened! it was super crowded but so yummy! i felt bad for the restaurant next door who had zero customers while ajisen had a line out the door with a 20-30 minute wait.. the waitresses and cooks were standing there looking to see what the deal was.. afterwards, we went across the street for dessert because hui lau shan was having a 99 cent special for their coconut sago.. MMM.. what a steal!

i love chik-fil-a.. i haven't been there in years because they only had them in texas.. but today we went to the one in tustin marketplace.. yum! and the best part is.. they have  sweetened iced tea !! what more could a girl ask for!

made chicken marsala with extra mushrooms and pound cake with strawberries from trader joe's.. i haven't been to trader joe's in so long that i forgot how much i love it!

    i met iron chef morimoto today at the tofu festival...        ...and i won $10 at bingo!

    mmm we found the balboa bars...        ...and the frozen bananas

