Stay tuned for pictures and travel logs from my adventures..   C.*

Graffiti Art - Montreal '03        I see you... Actually, I really don't!   But I know you're there! Reading... admiring.. contemplating..  I'll have to post some more of my more unique pictures for your viewing pleasure... but my tush is numb!  In other words, I've been sitting in front of this radiation box for WAY too long..  Goodnight to all!  C.*

Another visit to the dentist... Life is good without benefits!  What are these people putting in my teeth... Cocaine??? 450 dollars.. for less than an hour of 'work'... yes, in quotations because 10 minutes of that hour were spent taking xrays and waiting for them to develop, 10 minutes for the damned dentist to show up.. and another 10 minutes shoving water up my root canal and sucking saliva and blood from my parched mouth... so really, only about 30 minutes of drilling and putting obscure sharp objects into my oral cavity!  So I ask, once again... why did it cost so much to put glue, caulking and a minute piece of metal into my mouth? It certainly doesn't feel like some hypersensitive materials when your whole head in throbbing in agony.. my poor body is going to reject it regardless of the quality, no?? I could be wrong, perhaps someone can shed some light on this matter!

La ville de Quebec..   what a treat it was to experience it you again! The rolling hills of Montmorency, the tumultous Jacques Cartier, the thunderous falls of St. Anne..  Quebec, you have a place in my heart!  Who would have thought I would have had the guts to paint on a wetsuit, and go shooting down 30 km of rapids with 7 strangers?  Delirious excitement replaced the debilitating anxiousness that seemed to devour me whole..  Wait for me, Jacques.. I will see you again soon!       14 hour trip.. one irrate driver.. 40+ degrees... " I'm not here for the falls, I'm contemplating suicide!!"       God bless you, Craven Inc.. I have a few lesser years of life thanks to you!       A quiet moment a few hours before I drank myself into oblivion... I'm all about first impressions!       If she wasn't so cute, I would have drowned her myself!       Chunk, you poor bastard.. How were you able to fall asleep with Furtado blaring?

       You have just invaded my personal webspace.   Pull up a chair, and sit on the floor!  I have just been introduced to the wonderful world of blogging by the ever infamous Angelo...  Yes yes.. let's all stand up and give him the credit he deserves for helping me to unleash the inner workings of my mind...  May God be with you all... there's no stopping me now!  C.*

“Help me, I’m manic…”  “Come with me..  You gotta see this!!  “I can’t take all the stereotypes.. I have a disease… The fact that I take drugs in NOT a cop-out..”  “Yeah, I do a little coke on the weekends… But I’m responsible.. I have a job.. I’m self-educated!”  “I just want to run away.. leave and never come back..”  “I know I’m being taken advantage of… but this is for real.. I’m in love!”    *Sigh*    Strength.. a lot can be said for it..  I grow weary of my readiness for a career in the human services field..  I’m drained of elation, my body limp..  My heart goes out to all those that have suffered, and continue to suffer… Physically, and emotionally..  Confide in me, tell me all your darkest secrets.. make my skin crawl with stories of terror and abuse… of violence and self harm.  Show me your scars, reveal your wounds… make me feel the pain you incurred in your tender soul… that now bleeds before me… Waiting for salvation from certain demise!  In a dizzying stupor, I drag my drained carcass around… devoid of energy and optimism.. My heart goes out to all those that reach out to me..  Little did I know that such a dark past would launch me into a life of servitude to those whose lives remain in shambles, in utter chaos…  All those who suffer, with hands on their faces holding back rivers of tears… Reach out to me, I will nourish your desiccated hearts, and embrace your withered souls…



    ..And now, deep thoughts....

    Chick, you look like plastic... why are you so damn shiny?

    Standing pretty in downtown Burlington... Ya, we down with da burlington hood! :P

    Jules, demonstrating her 'skills'..

    I want bigger weights for my bday... 15lbs and up! :P

    hmmm.. spanakopita... Too bad it takes so DAMN long to make, and such little time to eat the whole damned thing! :?

    Enough said!

    Just.. a.. little.. further....

    Monkeying around..

    Lazy afternoon at the park - June 27, 04

would you believe the night i had?? I doubt it.. Between the country western bar, driving two strangers around Brampton, a seedy bar of toothless joes and middle aged cougars, and a group of coccaine sniffing folks, I had one seriously fu*ked up evening..  It was the kind of night where you can actually imagine yourself across the room looking what you're doing and thinking "What the hell.... who is that?"  I'll spare you the details.. but I'm still scratching my head and thinking... was last night a nightmare?  A creepy look at the lives of mentally ill lower class 20-something year olds..  Some Jerry Springer sh*t I tell you..   In retrospect, I feel pretty damn normal AND sane..  Amen!

A melancholic moonlight cast eerie shadows on your face  as it pierced through the curtains. I kissed you without haste begging you for forever My embrace imprisoned you as you bled in my arms. No longer mine, your body escapes from my hands. Our room, you said resonated your unhappiness As my fearful tears echo the truth of our impending demise. No longer enraptured by the passion in my breath you leave me fragmented, tormented as your words devour my soul. The floor beneath us vanishes, my hopes dissipate into a murky reality. No formalities, just a simple goodbye As you fade into the background like an ethereal dream.

You don't know what words will remain once the restlessness  in your chaotic mind  has subsided.. You don't know of the emptiness that will devour your days when your desiccated soul is no longer nourished by my insatiable love.. As you struggle to find meaning in your belligerent existence, you don't know the acerbity on your scorched lips is the venom that fuels your malevolent heart. You don't know of the loneliness you will feel when you wake tomorrow to find yourself,  alone, with nothing to comfort you but the permanence of happier memories when you found me by your side...

Angel, cooperating and actually posing for me for a change!   

Montreal - Angel and her favourite breakfast hangout... note the little dead fishies floating belly up moments after she stuck her feet in the fountain!  

Montreal - Angel, two minutes before the security guard kicked us out!  

My favourite model - Angel  

Old Montreal  

Lines  

Notre Dame - Staircase Detail  

Tower Detail - Humber Lakeshore Campus  

Lightpost - Notre Dame (Montreal)  

Defeated  

Aaaw!  

Shoppin' downtown!  

june '04  

june ' 04  

Exercise does a body good! :)  Who knew?  

My million dollar smile at D&B  

Yet another random picture.. Laying around  

Mercury Square Uranus with an orb between 3 and 5 degrees   Brilliant and original as you are, you can also be difficult and unpredictable. Close ties may complain they never know when you are going to show up or what you're planning next. You are easily bored and love people who can both stimulate and surprise you.    Mercury Trine Neptune with an orb between 3 and 5 degrees   You know things intuitively as well as rationally and have a rare capacity to perceive in others feelings, thoughts and dreams they may never have openly shared. Anyone close to you would have to share your love of music and interest in spiritual thought.    Sun in Cancer:   Your sensitivity and nurturing nature are comforting to others. Your ability to create a warm, cozy environment anywhere makes others feel secure.    Mercury in Leo:   You describe everything dramatically, with color and flair. People love to hear you tell a story.    Venus in Cancer:   Your love nature is nurturing and protective.  You are happiest when creating a cozy nest.    Mars in Gemini:   You thrive on variety and are able to do several things simultaneously.   I don't know who figures this out, or how even how they come up with it... But it rings true...

    My best dead bunny impression..

    Cute.. but the little one's trying to choke me!

    Being in nature always seems to bring out the best in people!

    Mum TRYING to lift me up... TRYING being the operative word!

    We're all puppets in God's world... Minus the strings!

    Trust me.. I KNOW where we're going!

    " I love it!! I LOVE MY BUG! "

    "Really?? That's so funny??"

    Contemplating my move... No, I didn't miss!

    Ztuper - " Watch this.. she's gonna miss! "

    We look good... but why can't we play like we normally do? :/

    Yeay, my local dive still allows smoking!!! Teeheeeeee!! :)

Rolf - "I say.. I I I I say why don't you come to my office so that I I I I might discipline you?"       

So you like to embarass me.... Enjoy this photo, Jules! :P       

Carla's astrological profile  Sun in Cancer  When Carla was born, the Sun was in the Sign Cancer, the Healer. Carla has a powerful imagination, combined with a remarkable ability to tune into someone's deepest self and to make people feel safe around her. Carla longs to be treated with as much profound sensitivity and nurturing as  can give. Carla wants security, roots, and ample room--inner or outer--to let that imagination flow. If a relationship doesn't feel safe, she may retreat into a Cancerian shell. A great intimate art for Carla, one on which the health of her adult relationships depends, involves learning to insist that her needs and feelings are just as important as the partner's, rather than hiding behind co-dependent invisibility.  Because the moon, which rules this sign, has no light of its own but shines by the reflected light of the Sun, you have a need to find an inner center. Your power can be very great, or very insecure, and you shine best when you are centered on others outside your own personality. You make very nurturing, loving partners, however, and take great pride in giving very inventive presents to those close to you. You are firmly committed to children and a family life, but you do enjoy variety and change within a need for continuity. You are naturally attracted to the caring professions such as teaching, nursing, social work, counseling, psychic healers and psychologists.  For you, fulfillment is more important than ambition, although you like to make money and can even hoard it at times.   You are like a receptive sponge, taking in all around you, sensitive to your environment, building a hard shell in which to hide at times. You are naturally nurturing--the mother of the zodiac--moving with the ocean tides, surging and ebbing like the moon. Your symbols are the womb, the house, the home, the interior of all things. As a Protector, Cancer carries its house upon its back, thus your home can be two places--on land in the real world, or in the water in the emotional world. Your greatest challenge is to find an inner center or shell and function from there.  You possess a subconscious mind that keeps many things hidden. Nothing is very clear or direct for you. You tend to respond to most things through your feelings, which can appear to others as vague. Many times, feeling and thinking are not separated. As a result, you can be very psychic.   You are usually gentle and kind, unless you are hurt. In that case, a vindictive and sharp claw can attack, and can even smother. You move sideways, like a crab, when in love, avoiding confrontations, sometimes hiding behind protective urges.  They have incredible memories, and use their "antennae" to probe what is in front of them, asking: "Is it safe?" Cancer rules the stomach or "gut feeling," so they typically make decisions using their intuition. Their tough shell, if not matched with an equally secure interior, can prove crusty, hard and judgmental.

Is it 10:06 pm already??? SO much for watching a movie! :/ It's hard to believe that in 3 hours I've only uploaded one image into the blog of mine...  Haven't seen it yet???  It's in the titlebar... That's right, that manic-looking creature, not unlike myself right now!  Thanks for the call, Jules... must be a bad case of temporal amnesia!  Disgruntled,  C.*

They suck when it's ugly outside.. they suck even more when they make me miss the phonecall from my mom telling me that she arrived safely.. I was looking forward to talking to her! :(  It's penguin weather again at the office... feels like -10.. apparently it's 21 degrees in here!  Certainly NOT where i am sitting!  The only thing that keeps me alert and remotely content at work is listening to musak... I listen to   icebergradio  - It's a streaming audio site with 250 stations.. with every type of music you can think of.. check it out if you get the chance.. *prodidy-Narayan playing in the background*  Errrr.... it's still cold though!  It's a balmy 28 degrees where my mom's at right now.. I wish i was there instead!

What a dreadful day... it's rainy, and my joints ache really badly!  It's hard to imagine myself having a following, but it seems that there are quite a number of you checking out my blog on a rather frequent basis.. thank you for your kind devotion!  Authorization from the portuguese consulate finally came down yesterday, and as such, my mom, aunt and grandma will be flying to Lisbon this afternoon.. I hope that the flight goes well and they get to my grandmother's village safely!  Luckily, I am entitled to three days of bereavement from my work which i will use next week to stay home with Angel.. that way I can look after her and my father better, and still have a few days to catch up on some much needed zzz's..

I'll try to cheer up, I promise...  but yesterday's viewing was tough!   I sat in utter disbelief, imagining his chest move up and down as if he were sleeping.. people I didn't know arrive in two's every half hour or so.. they sat in silence at first.. then got progressively louder as the evening went on..  Some asked each other who my sister and I were.. and what we were doing at the front... I should have turned around and asked the same question myself..  if you don't know I'm related to him, you probably should not be tainting the air with inquisition.. you should probably be on your way out!  He looked peaceful for the first time in over 3 years... his lips looked unnaturally closed, and his withered face looked rosy and plump!  The sight of him would have sent my grandmother in a frenzy, I'm sure... I'm just glad she chose to stay home.. she will see him one last time before the actual funeral back home in Portugal, one final goodbye!  How do you ever say goodbye to your companion of 53 years.. your husband, father to your children, friend and confidante! God bless my grandmother, and her superhuman strength.. she is my superhero.. her determination and strength amazes us all! I wish you well, grandma.. you're my rolemodel!  I'm worn and tired... I'm not sure whether the work i have done today is correct, or accurate, but I'm plugging away regardless.. just looking forward to the end of the day so i can go home and help out my mom...  Thanks to all that have shown their support on this time of need.. Your kind words mean the world to me!

He was finally stolen from us.. death's frigid grip had its last laugh yesterday at midnite..   J.S. - loving father to 5 children, mindful grandfather to 9 grandchildren..  May you rest in peace, after so much suffering you endured these past 7 years.. your strength amazed us all... your agony ached in our hearts..   You're with the angels now..  they will take better care of you than any of us ever could fathom..   We love you, grandpa... We will see you again someday!

It's official, I'm getting better...  I can breathe again!! But not well enough to smell the incense-like aroma lingering around in the office (don't ask me.. I share my cubicle with a beagle that insists that he smells incense! Whatever!)  I should write an entry on the importance of taking what you want in school so you're happy with your job afterwards...  Not having a post-secondary education SUCKS, and i certainly can't wait till i finish my program cause paper pushing is certainly NOT the life for me..  Having said that, I got lots to push!  G' bye!

Just call me hack-a-lung.. but that's if i can hear you over my dry cough spells.. My hearing has been reduced to barely nothing, which works out great because my ultimate pet-peeve is incessant bitching.. And at work, it's highly abundant!  I still find it cool that my vocal range drops about an octave when I get a cold.. when I try to talk loud enough for people to hear, my voice cracks, and I sound just like my little pubescent cousin Diogo!  I wrote a blog entry earlier, but it got lost somewhere in cyberspace and I can't remember what I wrote before... Goldfish syndrome - so sue me!

I can't believe this freak cold that showed up out of no where... if they didn't keep the office at a temperature that puts most meat freezers to shame, I probably would be ok right now.. but here I am at work with my hooded shirt (thanks jules) looking like an ewok as Alan so kindly pointed out.. dripping profusely from the nose like a leaky faucet in a damp basement.. how's THAT for a visual!  I don't want your sympathy.. I just wanna get better NOW! :/

July 15, 04       Cerellean - are you in pain pooky??? :P  Bisonface - ME HAVE WELT IN ARM!   Cerellean - That's a shame.. it should have left a gaping hole!!  Bisonface - SPEAKING OF GAPING HOLES, HOW'S YOUR MOTHER?   Cerelleanblue - You must be confusing my mother with your mother.. aka the GRAND CANYON!  Bisonface - InchWorm brain!      Cerelleanblue - This program is kinda neat!  Bisonface - I THINK YOU ARE BAUSING IT ALREADY!  I WILL HAVE TO TAKE IT AWAY.   Cerelleanblue - What's Bausing, millipede eyes?  Bisonface - what i meant to say is (a)busing, platipuss feet.   Cerelleanblue - PLATIPUS, you illiterate troglodyte!  Bisonface - Platipus(s) is plurar for platipus, as in more than one platipuss.  Or is that Platipii?  Anyway, your feet, okay!   Cerelleanblue - do you mean PLURAL? You ARE a cake!   

I have started a new blog which is strictly devoted to mental health, relationships and friendship issues..  Consider this my official announcement!

How the hell did I get sick?    I got home after work last night... dead to the world... Collapsed on the couch and knocked out until I was startled from my sleep at 9:20 by my mother who told me to go to bed...  So I stumble upstairs through all the obstacles along the way, and drop my sorry carcass on my bed... only to wake up at 1:12... then 3:34.. than 5:50... 6:24...  That's when I gave up on sleeping and got my ass up to empty my bladder and do some morning crunches that hurt oh-so-good as I sit here looking at my work in disbelief of the volume that awaits me as I get myself mentally prepared to tackle the feat ahead of me..... Talk about a run-on - my sincerest apologies!  Somewhere between the sleeping and awake periods throughout the night, I managed to get sick through reasons still unknown to me!  So here I am.. with an incessant dripping of mucus from my nasal cavity right to the back of my throat... Yumm!  And now I leave you all to return to reality... I have 6.5 hrs of work ahead of me, and ZERO motivation... wish me luck!

Lovely.. just lovely!  The day after the big 2-5, and I am in disbelief that it all passed by so quickly :(  Today is stuper's bday, don't forget to wish her well! I'm passing out at my desk... I slept badly AND went to bed late.. that's a good combination... what a fool I am!  Sleep... I am in DIRE need of sleep!  I wanna go camping.. who wants to come camping? Summer looks like it's dwindling down.. it's almost over - or so it feels!  I want some fun... fun fun fun... Let's have fun!

     The Friendly Greek on the Danforth... nice place, but my only complaint? My calamari tasted like pork... almost like two meals in one!  Thanks for dinner, Stuper... it was a grand ol' time... now it's YOUR time to be old and feel miserable...  But looking on the brightside, you look hot! :P  Luv ya!

    "How old are you guys, 21?"

    Stuper - the booby shot!

    Stuper and I.. after 2 glasses of rose'

    Yumm... my grilled calamari dinner compliments of stuper..

Do I really look 25??  Screw all of you and your boring posts..  today, I  AM  the blogging queen!! I certainly did not get to shine today.. between being reminded of my "quarter-of-a-century" status, and having my hair ridiculed, I am in one damned pissy mood...   work was peachy today, I worked like a dog, unlike any other day (please insert sarcasm here)  but I got cake.... ooooooooooh... how about having the whole fucking day off WITH pay?? Oh no, I couldn't possibly accept that.. I would feel bad!! REALLY!! (insert sarcasm in here as well)  And by the by.... It's alright to be excited about a trip, but not to be making extensive plans and lists and schedules while at work, JULES! Calm the crap down already.. we'll figure it all out BEFORE we get there, I assure you.. now leave me alone and let me be a sordid old bitch in my corner while i cry over the years that have pass me by.... Unlike you, I have no youth left!  P.S - I need more booze!  And stop writing entries today.. today is MY day.. Whatever.. the heck with you all!          AND my hair is NOT frizzy, Gniedzjienko.. so screw you!

    One last one.. cause again.. It's my day! Yeay me!! :P

    I know I know... now I'm just being narcissistic.... so what?? It's MY day!

Turning 25 sucks ass... It does more so when it's overcast outside, and you have to be at work for it..  Nothing spells out responsibility, duty and maturity like working on your birthday... shows that you got your priorities set, and clearly, a birthday is just like any other day, right??  Sure, I'd like to believe that.... but it's NOT just any other day... it's a marker really... The day by which you can measure the rate at which your body is aging at, look back at another year and decide whether you've accomplished alot, or need to pick up your slack and get moving...  I'm perplexed this year.... have I done alot?  Have I been a good sister, a kind friend, a dilligent student, a proficient worker?  The cloud that surrounds me obscures my perception.... Single and loving it, or lonely and hating it?  Proactive or stagnant? Ambitious or content?  One thing I know for sure.... Turning 25 sucks!

    And then, it was all gone! :(

    Stuper.. being her fantabulous self!

    Stuper and Ronnie having a grand-'ol time!

    We took in the skyline..

    It all started with chinese...

Yeay, today is the day.. in a few hours we shall be bopping along to some good beats..  Stay tuned to see ALL the fun you missed out on... Suckers!  C.*

    System cruise - Tomorrow!

    I just want to thank you once again for waking me up EARLY, Jules...!!!

    "I love a hard, cold man!"

    There's the "I'm going to kill you" look I love so much!!

    When you gotta go.. you gotta go!

    Jules @ the Outdoor Art Exhibition, July 10, 04

    Christopher Hutsul booth - July 10, 04

I went out with stuper today... it was meant to be a bitch session, but we ran into some old coworkers and started talking about 50 million non-related things.. I did get to vent a bit, not as much as i would like to.. but i do feel a little more coherent... I'm tired... you can see how much by my pictures.. :(                 We're all drained and frustrated... I'm just looking forward to the upcoming escapade to Europe.. It's something i can focus on.. I'll need my strength for tomorrow.. I'm sure my mum won't sleep much tonight, she must feel awful.. I hate it when i can't help.. I feel like a useless tit! :(

I hate insensitive people.. I hate it when they see the agony and suffering of others, and yet they stand by.. oblivious!  I see it too often.. I saw too much of it today, and it made me sick.. It enraged me! A tender touch, a warm embrace.. they both go a long way when you heart is full of grief.. when death's frigid hands take hold of someone you love and refuse to let go..  Yes, it was another shitty day.. this rollercoaster of emotions is too much to bear alone.. but alas.. I am not alone in my suffering... others suffer too.. they suffer at the sight of someone they love so much slowly fading away..



this is super easy... click on a button and blog away.. today is yet another shitty day.. at least i get some free grub later, compliments of Jules and her fabulous workplace... We have nothing but cable on my end... this sucks ass!  Nothing to bitch about today, other than the fact that I feel squinty-eyed... I'm tired... drained.. exhausted.. It's the frying pan over the head for me today... I need some shut eye!!!! :/

You are likely to be drawn to romantic partners who are moody, whose emotional lives are something of a roller coaster. You are easily drawn in to others' tales of sorrow and hardship and your instinct is to nurture them back to a place of contentment and stability -- even at your own expense. You may have established a pattern of relationships in which you were the nurturer and your lover was the taker, who neglected your emotional needs in their pursuit of satisfying their own.  ---- Bullshit.. I just wanna find someone remotely normal, rational, sensible and generous with his time, love and affection... this is fucking harder than the quest for the Holy Grail... Damn it, i'm so lippy today! Yes, it's true.. I like wounded souls.. they have so much more breadth in emotional intelligence..   Whatever, I'm gonna shut up now.. I'm tired.. sweet dreams to all, and to all a good night!

Can this slowass day drag on any more?? Oh wait...   IT CAN!! :/

I like peaches… the non-fuzzy kind – are those the ones they call nectarines??  I like my peaches hard and cold… soggy fruit sucks!  My arm pits smell like peaches.. on account of the deodorant I have on, not because I have special pores that emit fruity scents.. that would be awesome!  This entry isn’t about fruit… It’s about the fact that I feel nauseated by the scent of my fruity pits.. It’s because I haven’t been able to sleep properly in a week now and I’m too tired to focus on the road when I drive in to work… or because I sit in a daze when I’m at home while people talk to me..   my mom didn’t sleep well either.. she had a bad backache… she’s been restless of late, working like a dog to distract her mind from the impending doom.. We’re all miserable these days… it’s hard to watch a loved one fade away as you stand by, unable to do anything to help..  His body is frail, brittle, his breathing labored and intermittent…  My heart aches at his sight!  I hope I can find the strength to keep being supportive and empathetic in a time when I feel I have nothing left to give, nothing to spare..  Tomorrow will be better…maybe I will be able to sleep and regain the physical strength I so desperately need!

A more elaborate model that incorporated eight personal characteristics accurately sorted out 92 percent of the creative superstars from the less eminent. The presence of these eight elements of eminence greatly boosts a person's chances of achieving lasting fame, Ludwig maintains, although poorly understood social and historical forces probably decide whether one's full creative potential is realized. Truly great creative achievers, in Ludwig's model, usually    1. display special talents or abilities as children;    2.  receive support for developing those qualities from parents, who often have creative or aesthetic bents as well as emotional difficulties of their own;   3.  harbor an ingrained contrariness and opposition to established beliefs, which frequently antagonizes other people;   4.  possess a capacity for solitude and self-reliance;   5.  face physical trials early in life, often a life-threatening illness or physical disability;   5.  emblazon their works and achievements with a personal and distinctive style;   7. exhibit an unyielding drive for dominance and supremacy in their chosen discipline;   8.  experience a restless, driven state of psychological unease that finds relief through creative problem solving.     10 characteristics of creative people:    * Great deal of physical energy yet are focused; even appearing to be quiet or seemingly at rest.   * Smart and intelligent yet possess a quality of naivete.   * A childlike playfulness about them yet (this can be disciplined); in many ways responsible yet somehow irresponsible.   * Imaginations are good at fantasy yet can also be rooted in sensory reality.   * Able to be both humble and proud at the same time.   * Possess both introversion and extroversion traits simultaneously, but in balance.   * Somewhat androgynous - they posses a broader range of sensitivity; both hemispheres of the brain are utilized in conert whereas most men are usually left dominant and women right.   * Visionary in scope with quality, original response (not usually bizarre) yet also with a good grasp of conventional values.   * Passionate yet at the same time capable of detached objectivity.   * Greater sensitivity to the suffering and pain of others yet also capable of greater enjoyment.      Emotional Reactivity.  Both artists and manic-depressives tend to be highly sensitive to stimuli both from the outside and from within. Andreasen calls this an ":extremely fine-tuned": nervous system, sensitive to a wide range of stimuli, including pain. She has speculated that this results from ":input dysfunction": or ":a defect in the cognitive mechanisms which filter stimuli.":    Disihibition.  Psychologist Ralph Tarter of the University of Pittsburgh says a ":fundamental breakdown in inhibitory mechanisms": is characteristic of most psychopathological conditions. This breakdown, which can also be stimulated by alcohol or drugs, leads to farfetched connections, and -- as is true in many artists -- easier access to unconscious material. Manic thinking flows freely, and includes man loose and novel associations.    Absorption.  Hypomania is associated with superior powers of concentration. Harvard neurologist G. Robert DeLong, who studies children with early signs of manic-depression, says that these children have significantly richer imaginations than most. They show an ":unusual intensity of focus": when engaged in creative tasks, which results in impressive feats of memory and highly detailed drawings. They can become lost in fantasies for hours on end.

Some feel disgust at the sight of a defeated heart… others, see beauty in the tenderness of a broken spirit..  Beauty, I think to myself… I fail to see anything beautiful at the core of malevolent regrets, heart-wrenching agony from impulse decisions, failed attempts to pull oneself from the depths of an infernal limbo that plagues a tortured mind…  Out of pain and struggle comes creativity, I once heard.. A lot can be said for a tortured soul.. a wounded spirit..  images of flowers and surreal sceneries can’t come close to illustrating the strife some of us feel…  Some write, some paint, some self-injure in hopes of temporary relief from a pain that never seems to subside..  Others fall prey to their emotions and end their suffering with one last impulse.. one last attempt to free themselves from their cross.. I pray for their souls.. their pain, I feel in my heart..  One day, I will see you on the other side..  In fields painted yellow and cerulean blue.. laced with scents of spring and fresh dew… Where the sun’s brilliance will light your face and dry your bitter tears.. and replace your permanent grimace with a heartfelt smile that you haven’t seen in years…  Wait for me… I too long for relief… but not yet… There’s much work still to be done on this side..







    contemplating my mortality... your mortality.. our mortality.....

they come swiftly and quickly without warning... Usually at the most inopportune times in your life when God knows you need rest..  Life is so finite when we are faced with someone elses mortality.. a frail body desperately clinging to existence with every laboured breath.. the heart aches in sight of such misery... their impending death resonating in our own bodies as a part of us slowly withers along with their fragile health..  It's a sad day.. the sun seems faded.. the sky feels grey... my skin feels numb... my heart is broken... my soul is weary..



    What??

    The bridge - `a la Julie, July 1

    The monkeys - July 1

    The rebel - July 1

    An interesting twist on a papparazi shot, `a la Julie... July 1

    June 30, 04

 Systemsoundbar  cruise is happening again on July 11th... You can pick up tickets from System or from Play de Record..  Click on event calendar for details..

F#%*!ng Internet explorer.. crapped out on me.. now I have to re-write everything i wrote before..  Everyone that is off today.. enjoy - BASTARDS!  I'm stuck at work.. I hope we're not working all day!  Thank you to Julie, for being such a wonderful guest... for coming over and enjoying my meals as if they were her last.. you're awesome babe! :)  As the big 2-5 approaches, I think back at all my adventures, sorrows and challenges and say, Bring it on, life!  With great friends by my side, with my determination to make a better life for myself and the family I will someday have, I know I will overcome whatever hurdles await me..  Thanks for writing back Angelo... you missed a wonderful evening! DORK!  Anyhow, enjoy the weather, piss ants!  I gotta work!  C.*

Hello kiddies! Another day in paradise, ain't it?  Looks nice outside, wish I was out there! Nothing new to report other than the fact that I spent 4 hours on my computer, just to find that it didn't work.....   YEAY  !  I'm a very disgruntled porkchop this morning!  Lucky for you all that don't have to work with me! hahaha  Kisses  C.*

It's been a while now since i updated this page... My computer went to hell! :(  I can't find my copy of windows XP which i desperately need to fix my computer.. :( Everytime i log on to windows, it logs me off right away... and so here I am, feeling out of touch with the world... left with nothing to look forward other than to come into work where i can check my email and manage my bank accounts.... Sucky!  My mom came back last friday from Portugal... she brought clothes and cheese... I'm so lucky! ;)   All is well, other than the fact that I'm sleepy and sore... God bless mr. Pilates!

    Angel and Jules

    In the crack, with Angel

    ...the abyss.. Mt. Nemo Aug2, 04

... I can't stop thinking about this trip.. I can't concentrate at work.. I hardly get it done :P   I'm constantly on the net... looking for cool cities to visit.. checking out pictures of the places i intend on visiting.... I'm elated... can't sit still....    I want to go now! :(

... I can't stop thinking about this trip.. I can't concentrate at work.. I hardly get it done :P   I'm constantly on the net... looking for cool cities to visit.. checking out pictures of the places i intend on visiting.... I'm elated... can't sit still....    I want to go now! :(

