Post 1, just checking.... Sunday 7 o'clock. I've just sent the invitations... Has anyone joined yet?... Feel free to post in any language, ok?

Juliana, I couldn't see the pix you sent me.... I was wondering if you'd mind trying again.... They're really important tio because I will never forget that surprise party!!

Ok, on Wednesday 3rd grade normal class. Alessandra & Fernanda will finish Past Perfect with the 7th. On Thursday, only tests, no need to come.

Ok, if nobody writes, I write. I'd like to know our schedule for this week. Who helps me? ;-)

Now we're all administrators of the blog!!! Top-notch, uh?? Tomorrow winter begins,,, Let's not forget that  one must have a mind of winters....

Hi, guys! I've just arrived from PUC and decided to post a message here to tell you all that the seminars at PUC today were just wonderful. I really appreciated them. Those who I met there know what I'm talking about. I'm sure we learned a lot today.  See you.

Não haverá plenária!! A quarta é normal... See ye... Evandro

Meninas, se vcs estão com problemas para escrever algo, tentem entrar no blog pelo endereço www.blogger.com lá digitem o username e o password. Esse é o caminho! :) Kisses!

My dear friends, I'm trying to post our pix here... but I think it's not possible! I've just read the help and I have this sad new for you... ;( , , ,

Remember? I've suggested some alternative stuff for your internship, in case you're interested, such as: a) watch the movie 'Pi' and elaborate a seminar to be done by 22 or 23 graders. b) watch the Iranian movie 'The Jar'and write about connections between the movie and our practice. c) write journal entries, about what you see & feel & would like to investigate at the classes you're attending at CAp.  more to come soon... feel free to post your own suggestions....

Finally I'm here my friends! I was feeling so alone. Later I'll post the pics I took during the week.  Kisses, Juliana

Our schedules for the 21 & 22: 21: June 7h: Group presentation June 10: holiday June 14th: Group presentation and ____________? June 17th: OPEN! Binder or CLIP! June 21st: OPEN! Binder or CLIP! June 24th: OPEN! Binder or CLIP!  June25th: Niver do UNCLE BECAUSE!!!  22: June 7th: TEST June 10: holiday June 14th: SLOGANS June 17th: SLOGANS June 21st: OPEN! CLIP??? June 24th: OPEN! CLIP???  June 25th: Niver do UNCLE BECAUSE!!!  So, as you can see, I've opened some dates for you!!! Suggestions and participations are + than welcome!!! Write here or talk to me...

Why do people join, comment, but do not post?? I wonder.... Nothing to say, maybe... Oh, c'mon...

Fui ao Conselho da Oitava, junto com a Adriana e a Fernanda (how did you like it, girls?), mas este post é para avisar que NÃO DEVO MAIS IR AOS CONSELHOS ESTA SEMANA!!! Tenho que preparar seminário e monografia para o Doutorado, então resolvi voltar logo para casa na segunda, quarta e quinta... Qq dúvida, write me or post here... allthebest....

