    Who uses pay phones these days?  Beaverton  

I’m half way through    Seven Pillars of Wisdom   (SPW) by T.E. Lawrence.  I read it for the first time several years ago.  But after 9/11 the book has new meaning.  Lawrence was a scholar and simple map maker in British military intelligence who, through happenstance and a desire to make a difference, found himself leading a band of Bedouin in a guerilla war against the Turks. Lawrence had a belief that traditional British military strategy would fail in defeating the Turks in Arabia.  He clearly understood the Bedouin could be motivated, and realized how the Bedouin could potentially defeat the Turks if only they could overcome their clannish tribalism and work together.  None of his superiors believed it could be done.  It is amazing to watch Lawrence pull together these tribal Bedouin by sheer personality and will.  An effective Arab culture ended with the First World War.  SPW shows an Arab culture as it is first outpaced by changes in the world around them.  What was an effective way of life was really outpaced by the Turks prior to WW I. Contrasted with today’s current events, SPW provides background and insight.  SPW is a classic in many ways; travelogue, cultural exposition and handbook for asymmetrical warfare.  It’s clear that Lawrence loved the Middle East and the Bedouin who populates most of it. A stand-out of military memoirs, SPW is well written and a very entertaining read.  The only weakness is a propensity to name these hundreds of Bedouin he meets in his travels, only to never be mentioned again.   This is a story by men about men.  There are no women in this story, and are rarely even in the background as cooks and mothers in camp and distant wives while traveling.  The relationships between men described in detail.  It was surprising to read about the apparent acceptance of homosexuality between young unmarried men in Bedouin culture.    The descriptions of the landscape and daily life are richly detailed.  From feast to near famine, the weather, landscape, life and death in the desert become very real.  The book describes his military campaign and the politicking and diplomacy required to make it happen.  It’s very interesting to compare the Muslim culture depicted in SPW and the Middle East today.  Similarities and additional background can be seen in SPW.   All in all, a very satisfying book on several levels.

    Lilly pads, Mirbeau  

Skaneateles, New York is a destination for me several times a year.     Mirbeau   is at the primo end of the spectrum, with the Microtel and Holiday Inn of Auburn serving the dubious role of counterpoint.  Mirbeau is a high-end spa and small hotel with 34 rooms.  Set half way up a hill, Mirbeau has a French provincial architecture.  There is a pond surrounded by the hotel lobby and restaurant and two wings of rooms, one made up of 4 room cottages, the other rooms in a wing off the hotel lobby.  The koi pond combined with the architecture brings to mind    Monet’s Giverny .  The sounds of about a half dozen bull frogs and some tree frogs punctuate the night.  I’ve only stayed in cottage rooms.  They are quite and quite large.  Each room has a gas fireplace, king size bed, and desk with 100 Mb/s Ethernet connection. Oh, there’s a TV too.  Compared to the upper floor, the ground floor rooms have a patio and an additional window. The bathrooms are good sized with two sinks, a shower for two and a large claw footed old fashioned bathtub.  The Mirbeau is quite generous with their water; the show has an old fashioned shower head that produces prodigious amounts of water. (None of those tiny air/water mixing shower heads here.) The bath is bisected by a diagonal wall unit with the sinks on one side and the toilet on the other, separating it from the rest of the bathroom.  I only have two gripes about the rooms, the wall switch for the toilet area is hard to find (and its dark back there), and the desk chair is unpadded and thus poorly suited for more than an hour or two of work.  Oh ya, and each room as a Boise Wave clock radio with remote.  Usually they have the radio on playing classical music when you check in.  The alarm clock is too complicated for me, I use my cell phone.  The main hotel building has two levels; the upper is the lobby with a small bar and seating area that overlooks the pond. The lower level houses the spa where they offer typical spa stuff; studies for aerobics and yoga, a weight room, etc.  As I’ve never partaken in the spa services I won’t say any more other than they seem to have a very complete offering.  The restaurant appears to be very very good – quite the “fine dinning” experience.  Dinner prices are very expensive but probably worth it.  I’ve attended a dinner reception there that was catered by the restaurant and it was quite good.  Yesterday I had lunch there and ordered off their Tasting Menu.    Quite good.    Breakfast is well done but typical breakfast fare.  They do have a breakfast waitress who has the most striking blue eyes.  Their best desert, and quite popular, is bread pudding.  A warm rich creamy sauce (sort of a custard with some areas firmly cooked and others runny) with chunks of 70% cocoa chocolate, and cut slices of croissant.  Wow.  Sadly they’ve taken their signature desert off the menu and replaced it with this chocolate thing about the size of a double high biscuit.  The top half is chocolate mousse, the bottom is this greasy peanut butter/chocolate fudge with something like Rice Crispies mixed in it.  This and crème brulie were offered as their replacements to the bread pudding.  You can also walk across the parking lot to get to    Rosalie’s , a very nice Italian place that’s only a notch or two below the Mirbeau.  Rosalie’s is considerably less expensive than Mirbeau as well.  Overall, Mirbeau is a great place to stay – beautiful and comfortable.

    Mirbeau pond and Japanese bridge  

    Night shot of pond in the rain at Mirbeau  

    Blue Water restaurant -- sunny warm weather in central NY brings 'em out.  

    Waiting in line for the E to B terminal shuttle at O'Hare  

Whether you’re left or right, statist or dynamist, you can’t help but laugh at Alexandra Pelosi’s “home movie” shot during George Bush’s 2000 election campaign.  Much like a contemporary video version of    Boys on the Bus , Journeys with George captures well the flavor of the campaign trail and the role of the media in the campaign.  I watched the movie on my laptop flying from Chicago to Portland.  I laughed so much that my seat mate asked what I’d been watching.  Vignettes of the candidate, George W. Bush are the focus of the movie; capturing many unguarded moments, mostly goofy and funny.  But the real story is what the grinding year long campaign does to the relationships among reporters and “shooters” (photographers) and between them the candidate and his staff.  This is not a pat movie with a strongly biased point of view.  The portrayal of the principals is very straight forward.  There is also ambiguity – about what kind of man Dubya really is, the role of media, and the biases that everyone brings to the campaign.  The story seems to roll back and forth between an adversarial relationship between candidate and media, and one of shared experience and camaraderie.  And this is not just a political movie.  There’s enough partying, romance, rumor and life to entertain even the apolitical.

In upstate NY this week.  The following from the first half of the trip.

    Mall babe, Houston  

    Hey, I'm no   Raymi , but I can't figure out any other way to get a photo up for my profile...  And no, I hadn't been drinking.  

    McMenamins Brewpub  

    Dinner in SFO  

    Creepy tea pot lid  

    Chrysler Town & Country  

    Incredible   fractal  graphic wallpaper.  [via   Pontus ]

    The next   Lara Croft ?  Jade from   Beyond Good and Evil  -- how I spend my evening...  [via   GamersMark ]

Well I've wasted the entire evening playing a new game,   Beyond Good and Evil .  A great third person adventure game, BG&E is a "sleeper" -- a top notch game that for some reason has not gotten the cred it deserves.  Super graphics, a hot protagonist, good plot, puzzles, action -- its got everything but gore.  Will post some stuff tomorrow...

      Typo Generator  -- a site that converts text into an artsy-fartsy art poster. Pretty cool, just type in some text and the site creates a graphic design based on the text.  [via   Neurastenia ]

    Two for one dog blog Friday.  Dakota and Cocoa gettin jiggy with it.

industriously intelligible  esteem elderly  evidently ablest  [what is   Spam Poetry ?]

    Nectar of the gods,   Desert Juniper Gin .  

I developed a taste for gin and tonics in college.  They were great for those hot and humid Texas summers.  When the heat hit Oregon this summer we broke out the gin and tonics once again. It was over 100 degrees last weekend.  In a gin inspired stupor I was compelled to dedicate an entry to my favorite gin,   Desert Juniper Gin .  Still buzzed after dinner (mesquite smoked pork loin roast, arugula salad with shaved parmigiano reggiano, french bread) I got on the web and started my research. I had no idea booze reviews could be so   pissy .  After learning the obligatory stuff like, "gin was invented in Holland in [either] the   1500's  or the   1600's .  I quickly became a scourge of...  oops, "IT" quickly became the scourge of the working classes and was called "gin madness" by the nascent nanny state of the time.  Anyway...  This stuff is really good.  It is micro distilled in small batches (I think that was redundant).  During distillation, they throw out the beginning of the batch and the end of the batch, keeping the smooth middle part.  The high desert in Oregon, where the distillery is located, has lots of naturally growing juniper.  The result is a richly aromatic juniper aroma combined with a surprisingly smooth taste -- perfect for really strong gin based drinks.  And you can buy it   online !  Juniper berrys also make a great ingredient in poultry marinades.

    Picking juniper berries -- is he having too much fun, or what? [via   Las Vegas Review Journal ]  

    Lead singer, songwriter   Chloe Matheou .   [via   Riddick White records ]

    Cinematic "  Psycho " allusion -- Chloe, lead singer of   Scream and Scream Again  victim of her own   Stalker .  

I was cruising the   NAM  :LIVE   blog  last night.    The latest post by Bronxxx is a Drive-By of a girl named Chloe Simone Matheou.    She’s the lead singer and guitarist for the band   Scream and Scream Again .  (And married to   Carl Porcaro , lead guitar of the band.)               The band has a post-punk style reminiscent of the   Lunachicks  that really rocks.    They don’t have any CDs burned, but there are some good   mp3 tunes  worthy of download and enjoyment.    Their rock/punk sound is matched by lyrics that are funny, ironic and   snarky .             "Money, Movie, Me" features a trance-like guitar intro and then moves into vocals reminiscent of   Patty Smith and a rollicking nihilistic anthem on desire, privilege and the eternal dream of something for nothing.  Listen   here . There's another version   here .     "Someone should put me in a movie Someone should give me some money Someone should do all things for me Just for being me    Everyone wants to be famous I would rather just take the cash"    Keep Your Mouth Shut (xerox girls version) reminds me of   Suicidal Tendencies  with a female Mike Muir. Chloe sings about her "best friend" who she threatens with revelation of a litany of sins from poor fashion sense to genital warts. Given the this casual hatred, one can only imagine what the best friend's supposed to keep her mouth shut about. Chloe's British accent sounds great in this cut. Listen   here .    Finally, we have a lo-fi home recording, "Stalker". This one's a more traditional hard rocker about a woman stalker who's obsessed about a man with "blue eyes, black hair". Listen   here .    How knows, they could be the next   X ?    UPDATE:  Welcome visitors from the Scream and Scream Again web site.

elixir morning child   gloried   detailed   [what is   Spam Poetry ?]

    Flower girl from the downtown Portland   farmers market .  

Ever since  someone  slipped my email address to a spammer, I've been getting multiple porn spams daily. Some of them contain subject lines with strange combinations of words – apparently computer generated  to fool spam filters.   Some of these subject lines are strangely poetic…     darkness intolerable            cure                bless         repayment complete

    Cocoa on the deck  

    Dog blogging Friday -- Dakota  

      Bouffe Chinoise  -- an incredible collection of freaky photos, Flash and video clips. NSFW [via   #!/usr/bin/girl   

    Went to San Mateo this week.  Flew into   SFO .  

      SFO  hotel shuttle pickup zone.  

NAM:LIVE! is not just an album, its part of a multi faceted creative effort known as the   Church of Nam  that spans images, the printed   word ,   music  and   performance art .  With a goal of world (media) domination, the creator of NAM:LIVE!,   Bronxx  and his crew, have chosen a provocative metaphor for their art – religion.  According to Bronxxx, the man behind NAM:LIVE!, "Once upon a time, an artist's work was commissioned directly by the fans, known then as patrons. Since those glory days, corporations have positioned themselves as the middle person between the artist and the audience, creating a monopoly that serves to homogenize artistic output and limit what the audience is allowed to see and here."  Homogenized artistic output is what I think about when I hear a group like   Train ; euphonic, vaguely familiar and about as memorable as Wonder Bread. NAM:LIVE's sound, style and method can't be pigeon holed. Its a rich gumbo of rock, rap, R&B, soul and funk - and very tasty indeed.  Take a listen,   here  and   here .   One of my favorites songs, Born to Rock, is an autobiographical song about Bronxxx experiences with a record label. He describes the absurd crazyness of the commercial music business; the fact that they don't really know what they're doing (as far as picking great talent) and their reliance on copying styles and genres in a misguided effort to make "safe" picks - which just results in bland boring heard-something-just-like-it crap. Its no wonder music sales are   down .   Production values on the album are good. This is an electronic album, there is little air or soundstage in the recording. Dynamic range, frequency range and EQ sound great.  Buy NAM:LIVE!   here .  [via:   Fleshbot ]  UPDATE:  Welcome NAM:LIVE Blog visitors.

My life is rated NC-17.  What is your life rated?    Hat tip:   Nightwalker

If the best source for good music is word of mouth, then why is it that most published music reviews suck?  Many reviews are masturbatory exercises where critics expound on how this reminds them of that, or pontificate on imagined influences and precedents of the music at hand.  Nothing is provided about whether the music is actually any good or not, nor why – besides maybe some stars or other rating scheme.  I blame this all on   postmodern    art    theory ; an insiders dialog in a language that only other insiders understand. For example:  “This, the sophomore effort for Steaming Manhole Covers, has a dark backbeat rhythm reminiscent of   Death Cab for Cutie .  Smith’s vocal stylings, obviously derived from Blue Airline Blanket’s feverish Todd Merryweather, perfectly captures the angst and passion of this album.”  What? Death Cab for Cutie has a dark backbeat?  Only one?  And who the hell are Blue Airline Blanket?  Feverish?  This stuff gets boring real quick.  Of course, music is a very personal thing. What people like varies widely.  It’s a rare thing when I can find a reviewer whose taste I share. And when that match reveals itself, I latch on.  Even when it comes to sharing music recommendations with friends, occasions where tastes converge rather than collide is rare.  Its fun too, to figure out the meaning behind any kind of creative effort (it’s not always just about sex and drugs).  Not necessarily the most insightful, your humble blogger checks out other reviews for perspective more monumental than my own.    But the most important part of a review is whether the album in question is any good or not.  Unambiguous opinions (with explanations) are essential.  Even if you hate the stuff I like, at least you’ll know what not to buy.  How a recording actually sounds is also very important to me, so I include an assessment of the sonic qualities of a recording.  For reference, at home music is reviewed on a Naim   CD2  CD player and Naim amp and pre amp.  Speakers are Celestion.  Naim interconnect and speaker cables are used throughout.  On the road I use a Sony portable CD player and an iRiver IFP-390P mp3 player with Sennheiser M500 earbuds and   Etymotic    ER6  earphones.  The Etymotic earphones are a must for air travel.  This inside the ear canal earphone provides the best isolation from loud ambient noises.

    Dakota, house guest  

    Dog blog (almost) Friday -- Cocoa, our family Pit Bull  

    Raymi, cult   figure . Hat tip: lobeline.net   

    A classic Raymi self portrait  

    The Minx herself  

The self professed blogfather (of soul?),   Raymi the Minx  is a conundrum. She’s wicked funny when she’s not pissed off or seriously depressed.  Her writing can be an exercise in abstract expressionism or achingly beautiful.  Raymi, whose real name is Lauren, is an “old soul” – her blog does not seem written by a 21 year old woman, except when she comes across as a twelve year old.  I did say conundrum, right?  She’s authentic and yet you’re always guessing if everything is for real. She assures her readers it is very real.  She’s been blogging since 1999 and is a   highly valued  blog.  I've been hitting her blog since about 2000.  She’s quite a writer and a regular contributor to   Rocketpack .  My favorite story is   Raymi-Hump Monster  a delightful story of young innocence, passion and dolls. There is a great story   here   about how to lose weight. (She had me change out a photo of her because she didn't think she looked skinny enough.)  It won’t take too much exploring of Raymi’s world to discover two things; she’s a beautiful young woman and she likes to take pictures in various stages of    undress .    Go visit Raymi’s   world .

    the emo life -- Hat tip: www.fourfa.com  

Are you   emo ?  Do you know someone   who is ?  Can you recognize the   emo  around you?   Learn everything you need to know to be today's kind of cool right   here .  UPDATE:  It seems that the last link above has exceeded their bandwidth.  The link goes to a great low budget movie about emo that's a real hoot.  Be sure to check back later after their bandwidth meter gets reset.

These are words to live by.  Created by a Mexico City graphic artist in Flash,    Pornocha   is an homage to women: sweet, sexy and tawdry.    Made up of photos, illustrations (digital and analog), and Flash animations,    Pornocha   explores themes of carnal lust, S&M, and violence.  This is a hobby project site for the artist(s?) who appear to have day jobs as graphic artists.  Very creative stuff (if a bit sexually obsessed).  (NSFW)

    Prince's latest...  

Prince's latest offering,    Musicology  seems to be an album that people either love or hate.  Older Prince fans looking for more of the 80's stuff they loved(Little Red Corvette, 1999, Purple Rain) might be disappointed.  Time has not stood still for Prince, and nor have his musical sensibilities.    Musicology is a nice mix of soul, funk and unique amalgams of musical styles.  The album is varied with each song standing on its own, yet seemingly belonging to the whole.  Entertaining lyrics, good orchestration and high production values create a work that is both fun and a pleasurable listen.

    Gretchen Wilson  

    The ideal Redneck Woman?  

    Gretchen Wilson  

  Gretchen Wilson   is the latest country phenom.  This, her debut album, has been number one for 8 weeks. Her outstanding debut success is mostly due to the novelty appeal of her songs, "Redneck Woman" and "Here for the Party"-- both great irreverent high-energy songs.    Her music has an unvarnished authentic feel.  The best songs on the CD are the one's she's written herself.  These are the rocking, irreverent songs.  There are also some covers of ballads and other stuff.  I'm not a big country fan, with probably less than 10 CDs to my credit (or lack there of).  I like this one because of its immediacy and unvarnished truth.  Definitely not the slick production you would get from Shania or Faith.  That's a good thing.  Born in '73 of a 16 year old mother, Gretchen grew up among the corn fields and hog farms of Pocahontas, Illinois.  Living in trailer homes and working at bars since she was 14, Gretchen's paid her dues.  She moved to Nashville in '96 working a bar and singing in a cover band before getting hooked into the local singer/songwriter scene.     Buy  it.

    Cascade foothills  

    Mt Hood   

    O'Hare Terminal C -- my favorite airport, architecturally.  

    Another hotel room.  6am.  

    PDX -- heading out for another run to Chicago  

This week a quickie to Chicago...

    "I see you..." Girl and salaryman on Japanese subway.  David Crawford's   Stop Motion Study .

    Japanese Tommy Girl, one of David Crawford's   Stop Motion Studies .

Imagine sitting on a bus or train, entering a trance-like state. You slowly become aware of how the shadows cast by objects outside the vehicle move along the walls,  how the people move in sympathetic motion with the train, and how everything moves through space.  This is the feeling of watching   Stop Motion Studies .   Now consider the people-watching possibilities of public places (or on public transport).  Imagine taking slices of time, capturing peoples gestures, to be repeated so they can be studied and amplified, allowing the emotional content of those gestures to hit you repeatedly.  There is one more facet to the work, the subjects can see you watching them, and you see their reactions.      David Crawford  has distilled slightly disjointed slices of time, capturing people in moments from blissfully unselfconscious to moments full of discomfort, amusement, hostility or nothing.  What he has distilled is compelling in its distillation, strangeness and voyeuristic view of other people.  The artist chose subways as the locale because many types of people converge there, resulting in interesting dynamics and interactions.    I won't bore you with a bunch of   post modern  babble about "probing socio-cultural boundaries within our emerging digital environment" or "the project...not [being] about the transparency of these actors, but about exploring them" or "a stage upon which social dynamics and individual behavior are increasingly mediated by digital technology" (whatever that means). Almost sounds like a grant application, doesn't it?  Let's just say this is all way cool and worth spending some time exploring.  My only disappointment is that there's no sound to go with the images.    One  of Crawford's studies is like the movie   Koyaaniskatsi , presented as series of vignettes focused on micro and macro levels of human activity.  Here is a good   one , another one   here  and   here .  To view this project, you’ll need the following free software: Netscape or Explorer 5.0+ & Flash 6.0+  If anyone knows where I can buy a disc with some of these on them, let me know via the comments below.  [via   Turbulence ]

    David Crawford's   Stop Motion Study  of Japanese school girls on subway.

    Day 15, model with mannequin

    Day 15, castings of the model

 Here's  a photo essay on the making of a mannequin, from start to finish.  [via   Fleshbot ]

    Francois Berthoud, man of fashion

Fashion illustrator Francois Berthoud has been a leader in the field since the mid-eighties when he gained recognition as a regular contributor to the now defunct Vanity magazine. Over the past twenty years, his career has developed to make him a   mainstream artist  – one that recently had a solo show at the Swiss Cultural Center in Milan.   You can find a video interview   here .

    Friday dogblog--Dakota

    Classic   Raymi  -- disrobing in the Ladies room for the camera.

    Nietzsche's   Superman , Mark Leyner... say, doesn't he sort of resemble   Raymi ?

Well, this started out as an entry on   Raymi the Minx , but its morphed into one mostly about   Mark Leyner .  Raymi's writing reminds me of Leyner, so I started to reread a couple of his books,   My Cousin, My Gastroenterologist  and   Et Tu, Babe .  Leyner's writing is pretty deconstructed postmodern stuff. Imagine a   de Kooning  rendered in words, or a less coherent (but no less entertaining)   Hunter S. Thompson . His writing only verges on a narrative or plot. His work   is  "a very hyperactive mix of a biology thesis, a pop culture dictionary, and a homicidal terrorist weaving through rush hour traffic in an ambulance with an AK-47." When he's good, he's white-hot; when he's less inspired--well skip it, its not like there's a plot anyway.  Raymi is a female web-based analog to Leyner, an intersection of ego, stream of concousness writing, photography, some original artwork, and the public interaction between Raymi and her readers (currently referred to as douchebags), friends, acquaintances and family from Toronto. Here's one of her recent entries I especially   liked .  Her writing demonstrates the same quest for emotion, juxtaposition, and fun as Leyner. Raymi is more mysterious to me than Leyner, perhaps because she is presented as a person herself, whereas Leyner's writing is just that--writing. I don't know whether Raymi would be as mysterious if I actually knew her. I am sure though, that Raymi is even thinner in real life than she is in her photographs.    Leyner  tries to "give people a very unique form of pleasure. So I think they have a very kind of erotic appeal. But it's a kind of cerebral erotics. I'm talking about the feeling of pleasure that every person gets from reading. I want to make people laugh."  With the vocabulary of   Nabokov , Leyner writes word after word, creating a prose poetry that strives for poetry-like intensity, line after line. His third book,   Et Tu, Babe , is a shocking, tell-all, celebrity-studded chronicle that blends media, culture and trends with the same description-defying style as the rest of his work.  This is from   My Cousin, My Gastroenterologist :  I was an infinitely hot and dense dot. So begins the autobiography of a feral child who was raised by huge and lurid puppets. An autobiography written wearing wrist weights. It ends with these words: A car drives through a puddle of sperm, sweat, and contraceptive jelly, splattering the great chopsocky vigilante from Hong Kong. Inside, two acephalic sardines in mustard sauce are asleep in the rank darkness of their tin container. Suddenly, the swinging doors burst open and a mesomorphic cyborg walks in and whips out a 35-lb. phallus made of corrosion-resistant nickel-base alloy and he begins to stroke it sullenly, his eyes half shut. It’s got a metal-oxide membrane for absolute submicron filtration of petrochemical fluids. It can ejaculate herbicides, sulfuric acid, tar glue, you name it. At the end of the bar, a woman whose album-length poem about temporomandibular joint dysfunction (TMJ) had won a Grammy for best spoken word recording is gently slowly ritually rubbing copper hexafluoracetylacetone into her clitoris as she watches the hunk with the non-Euclidian features shoot a glob of dehydrogenated ethylbenzene 3,900 miles towards the Arctic archipelago, eventually raining down upon a fiord on Baffin Bay. Outside, a basketball plunges from the sky, killing a dog. At a county fair, a huge and hair man in mud-caked blue overalls, surrounded by a crowd of retarded teenagers, swings a sledgehammer above his head with brawny keloidal arms and then brings it down with all his brute force on a tofu-burger on a flower paper plate. A lizard licks the dew from the stamen of a stunted crocus. Rivets and girders foat above the telekinetic construction workers. The testicular voice of Barry White emanates form some occult source within the laundry room. As I chugalug a glass of tap water milky with contaminants, I realize that my mind is being drained of its contents and refilled with the beliefs of the most mission-oriented, can-do feral child ever raised by huge and lurid puppets. I am the voice…the voice from beyond and the voice from within—can you hear me? Yes. I speak to you and you only—is that clear? Yes, master. To whom do I speak? To me and me only. Is “happy” the appropriate epithet for someone who experiences each moment as if he were being alternately flayed alive and tickled to death? No, master.  Regarding his writing style and choice of subjects, Leyner   says :  "A lot of these things are funny because they're true and disturbing. We're often given horrible news in very cheerfully cold pronouncements, from doctors or nurses. You know -- you go into the doctor, then you're suddenly diagnosed, and the next thing you know, you've been handed this brochure about how to deal with your pathetic, remaining five years with some horrible illness. And of course the Q&A brochure has to be upbeat. It's probably been written and printed by a drug company whose drug you will be taking for the next few years.  "I used to write those Q&A brochures when I wrote advertising copy for medical advertising agencies. I was intrigued by the form because it's ostensibly a dialogue between two people. That's why one of my favorite parts of that Q&A brochure in the book is where one of the questions says, "This is a change of subject," and asks a question about baseball, and the brochure has this long tangent in it, making fun of the premise that this is a real dialogue.   Coincidentally, I do medical marketing.  Here's a   review  of his latest book,   The Tetherballs of Bougainville .

    Kate Winslet and Jim Cary in Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind.

How happy is the blameless vestal's lot!  The world forgetting, by the world forgot.   Eternal sunshine of the spotless mind!   Each pray'r accepted, and each wish resign'd;   Alexander Pope,   Eloisa to Abelard   If you could selectively remove memories, would you do it?  Past embarrassments, loves lost, life’s failures or disappointments could be excised with scalpel-like precision.  And if you had the technology to selectively remove someone else’s memories, would you do it?  For   money ?  Selectively removing memories would change who one is in more than obvious ways.  I would lose part of my humanity, part of my potential as a person, the part of my life that ripples out from that which they erased.  My reaction to everything that has come before, as much the bad as the good, is who I am today.  To erase that would be like receiving a noninvasive frontal lobotomy.  To provide such a service for money is immoral.  This is the premise of   Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind .  Love is cast as the experience that resonates in the character’s lives in spite of what’s cut out and cauterized from their memories.    This psychological premise provides the backdrop to a fragmented non-linier plot about love and destiny.  A major portion of the movie occurs in the imagination of Jim Cary’s character, Joel.  There are numerous flashbacks reinforcing the emotional storyline.  The origami plot can only be put all together once the movie is over--very nicely done.    Kate Winslet  plays Jim Cary’s love interest. She's a insecure girl who admits, “I’m not a concept, I’m just a freaked out girl who’s looking for her own peace of mind.”  (Okay, since I saw this on a plane, she probably doesn't say "freaked" in the movie.) Jim Cary does well in this dramatic role—a more “pure” dramatic role than he played in “Truman.”  In one of the beginning scenes on a train, Cary does a great a great Jack Nicholson impression, so subtle that I missed it the first time around. The rest of the cast is great as well.   I loved the movie, and the   critics  agreed. Okay, the movie is sort of a downer, but it has a happy ending.  And the character’s reactions to their plights is noble and compelling.   (Apologies to   David Lynch .)

    Christina Ricci at   Bald Stars , whoa!

    Oni -- Japanese demon who steals the souls of evil people before they die.  From   Encyclopedia Mythica

There is a great resource on the Classics, called   Encyclopedia Mythica . Lots of great info on ancient  societies--from Mesopotamian mythology to Japanese kami.  [via   neurastenia ]

    Xocolatl, the Aztec name for chocolate.

...but the soul needs chocolate.  A few years ago I spent the weekend in Paris.  As I roamed the city, every time I passed one of those little chocolate   shops , I'd stop and buy a bar of 70% chocolate.  At the end of the weekend, I must have had a dozen bars.    I've always loved chocolate.  Before this trip,   Dove  dark chocolate was my fav. It took me a few months to consume the   bars  from Paris, and then I was ruined for any chocolate I could find here in the states.  Finally, I found   Scharffen Berger  chocolate - I don't remember where exactly, but it was probably at the world's best grocery store,   Larry's Market .    Founded  by a former physician (who went to Paris to learn chocolate) and an ex-wine maker (champagne actually), Scharffen Berger's   bars  are every bit a match for boutique chocolate from Paris.    When they started their company they went to Europe and  bought old fashioned chocolate making   equipment , brought it back to South San Francisco, reconditioned it and started making chocolate the old world way.   They've since moved to   Berkeley  and now offer factory tours and even have a   cafe .  The secret to their unique flavor is their blend of beans.  They travel the world buying beans for their   hand crafted  blend.  In addition to their bars and cocoa powder, they sell   cocoa nibs .  Nibs are roasted cocoa beans separated from their husks and broken into small bits.  They're ideal for baking into biscotti or cookies, and great on ice cream or even cereal (yes, I'm a real chocoholic). For the ladies, they have cocoa   perfume .  Buy Scharffen Berger   here .  Today I found a worthy competitor to Scharffen Berger for "best chocolate" in the U.S.,   Dagoba  Organic Chocolate.  At the   Portland Farmers Market , there was a booth selling bars of Dagoba.  Founded on   Yoda's  home world, er, by a chocolate obsessed musician in Boulder, Dagoba has grown and moved to Central Point, Oregon.  They had two stand-out   bars , both dark of course.  The first is a 59% lavender and blueberry infused bar, the other a 74% bar called New Moon.  I've made   lavender shortbread  before, and this lavender chocolate is great - floral and earthy with a hint of blueberry flavor and occasional bits of blueberry.  Dagoba's claim to fame, is the "alchemy of   flavor infusion , an art they explor with "mystery and integrity."  Their lavender bar lives up to that billing. Dagoba also has their own unique   blend  of cocoa beans - also top quality.     Like many highly sought after things from Latin America, Dagoba comes in 2 pound bricks.  No nibs though.  You can buy Dagoba organic chocolates   here .  [Hat tip:   Beast Blog ]

    Alien space dog, Cocoa in Mason's tent.

    Dog blog Friday - Dakota after a bath, nice and shiney.

She's smart, articulate, and urbane.   Her blog is titled   Postmodern Courtesan , and in it she describes her observations on life from the perspective of a high class prostitute - to hear her describe it, it's not that unusual a life.   Her blog is erotic with a paradoxical blend of   intimacy and anonymity .  Her writing is straightforward and matter of fact; she sounds self confident and authentic, comfortable with her life and herself (no inferiority complex here).   She describes what its   like , how she provides   "cover"  for her professional life, her personal life -- from the   folks , to past   lovers . If you have questions, she will   answer .  Her blog handle is Olympia, and she provides a fascinating glimpse into her life.  I don’t feel voyeuristic reading her – she comes across more like a platonic friend telling you about her semi-secret life.  I just wish I had an image (a hand, knee or shoulder) to go with this post.

In what was a watershed event for me, this blog was bestowed some serious cred in   The Bronxxx Diaries .  I am now officially a "mothafucka", a considerable step up from my most recent designation, "asshole".    NAM:LIVE  and   Scream and Scream Again  are two great and very worthy examples of "non-commercial" creativity to be found on the web -- if you know where to look.  I was lucky to stumble across them both.  Sharing things I stumble across is why I do this -- and I'd love to hear from any visitors who have suggestions for music, literature, art and other pop culture.  Thanks to both Merlin and Chloe.

manuscript  fruitless bait  very  nor spared  [what is   Spam Poetry ?]

    My Playstation buddy, Jessica Alba.  She's pretty good, but I beat her

