My hope has fallen and crashed into the rock hard, steaming cement, and shattered into millions of tiny pieces.  I can smell nothing but fear and regret.  Will i be albe to piece the broken pieces of my hope and heart back together?  The lump in my throat and the tearing at my heart leads me to believe i will never recover from this tradegy, but deep down i know i will.  I always do.

Todays just another day.. I will be calling my case worker all day trying to get ahold of her and find out when in the hell im gonna be getting medicaid so i can start my treatment.  Its unreal to me how long this shit takes.. really!  When i got pregnant back in 2000 i freaking had medicaid the NEXT day!  But now, when im in a ton of pain and unable to work they take their sweet ass time..  its been 4 months i think since i applied.  Anyway, i will be at LCC tonight working on my math class.  Who doesnt love math, right?  lol.. i hope the sarcasm can be heard there.  Theres this really creepy guy though that i always see there.. even two semesters ago when i was there!  And he always follows me around and stares at me.. its really weird.  I hope hes not there tonight. I hope the huge semi-retarded kid isnt either.. cuz he REALLY creeps me out!  lol.. i know im so mean but its true.  And then fire up for Nick and Jessica tonight!  i hope i make it home on time.. I know, im such a loser..lol.  Watch for my post tomorrow!  it should be a good one:)  I'll be hanging out with my friend Tania.  We always have so much fun together:)  Even though i know i scare her probably.. lol.  euchre status: like 1720 weight status: too much

So yeah, i have got a little feed back from a couple different perverted men (no names will be mentioned..lol) that seeing "my first experience" lead them to believe this was a description of my "FIRST TIME".. lol.  Now, im wondering how many people were thinking that same thing.  Surprisingly enough i wasnt!  Condsidering im a perverted nympho myself thats quite shocking..lol.  Anyway, the results are in!!!  I do in fact have a herniated disc.  We all suspected that but now its proven through the great technology of an MRI:)  Also, for those of you that dont know.. i also have a curvature of the spine (aka scoliosis) and some other medical mumbo gumbo..  the doc says i need to do 6 weeks of phyisical therapy and if that doesnt work then MAYBE try a pain clinic and/or surgery.  No surgen will touch me without doing the physical therapy first though.. which is fine with me!  I dont want surgery unless it is absolutely needed but unfortunately my doctor does think it will come to that.  Honestly, i do too just because of my own "research" on it all.  So, im still waiting to hear from medicaid and then i cant get things done.. until then, just more waiting:(  as if it hasnt been long enough!  I cant wait till the day i can walk again and live a normal life.  For those of you who might not know.. my back is fucked up.  And has been for 7 months now.. i live on pain meds and anti-inflamatories and havent worked in over three months.  It all sucks ass but im hanging in there.  I'm so happy and grateful to all of my family and friends that have been there for me.  Which leads me to thinking about all the friends i have lost in the process..  Its really quite amazing to me when i think of it.  Mostly because i thought of them as "real friends".  Im not really sure of the reason exactally that i have lost my friends but it all happened when things went downhill with my back.  I think its because they were either embarrassed to be around me or they didnt want to invite me to do things because they knew i couldnt physically or financially do it.  In turn, causing me to be upset or resentful for them not wanting to spend time with me.  Although i try not to think about the fact that i have lost so many good friends it still reflects on who i am i think.  But like i said.. im so grateful for my family (especially my sister erin) for being there for me.  And i do have a pretty great boyfriend too, who is very caring:)  So that always helps!  One more thing on the whole "friends" thing.. it is so amazing but unfortunate at the same time that i have the best friends in the world, but they happen to live thousands of miles away.  I know in my heart i will see them again though.. soon.  No matter what problem i have in my life nothing can ever stop that.  I have said so much and still my head is overloaded with random thoughts.. thank God for Metallica!  I miss my ex boyfriend Doug sometimes.. and my cousin Cory even more (especailly when i hear great music like this).  I cry when i watch cheerleading on tv and i had a dream of my ex Ryan Pline last night.. Colby Bryant was there too but its not what you think:)  I wish my boyfriend lived closer and my new hair is awesome!  thanks erin:)  TO HELENA (my so cute swedish friend:)): i miss you girl!  I'm SO happy you read this.. i didnt know if you still even had that email or not!  And i would do anything right now to be back in Germany drinking a beer with you and all our old friends!  And holding your ass up trying to dance with your long skirt on too.. lol.  ben status: non existant hair status:  really good:)

Hi Everyone!  I should first appologize now for my puncuation mistakes.. believe it or not, i DO know how to write!  I'm just so used to writing on IMs or emails that i dont bother anymore.. lol.  So yeah, this is my frist journal entry online EVER.  I have never been too good at keeping up my journals in the past but i thought i would give it a try after christy sent me the link to hers:)  I'm really not sure if anyones even gonna want to read this but at least im putting it out there for you!  lol.  Today i actually had to set my alarm clock for the first time in .. well a long time, and like always, i wake up just before its about to go off.  I had to make my way out to my dads house to meet my step-mom (still sounds weird saying that!) to pick up a check from my dad to pay the loan payment since it was already 10 days late..lol.  good one dad!  Anyway, i couldnt get to their house because of construction going on and so i tried making my way around and ended up lost and out running out of gas.  So, i made my way home to call the witch and she proceeded to yell and scream at me for not meeting her..  of course she didnt wait to hear WHY i wasnt there!  Anyway, i got r done!  Im always excited for mondays, unlike most people i guess..lol.  Mondays my sister erin comes over and we have dinner and watch "our shows"  which consist of "for love or money" and "road rules".  Its great and tourturing at the same time.  They always leave me wanting more, thats for sure!  Those damn reality shows get me every time..lol.  Oh yeah, fire up for July 6th!  The new amazing race starts.. that was always my favorite:)  Well, tomorrow at 2:30pm i will finally be finding out the results of my MRI.  I cant believe the day is finally here!  Getting the MRI sucked ass though.. i was in SO much pain dispite the two vicodin i took before hand.  Lets hope i dont have to do THAT again.  I'll be posting the restults tomorrow for sure!    boyfriend status: got one sex status: need some

So i have an actual ticket to germany now!  I will be leaving Aug. 24th for Hannover, Germany.  The plan is for me to stay with Andre at his parents house for about a month until we find an apt of our own:)  Im excited for that!  And then we havent set an exact date to get married yet but i guess it will probably be early november.  I'm hoping, but not expecting, my sister Erin to come and stay through my birthday.  I would be so happy if that could happen.    I will be applying for a resident visa which will allow me to live over there when im married for however long i want.  I do not have to become a german citizen, and i will not.  Not any time soon anyway.. if i feel its the right thing to do years from now (if i have kids or something) i might consider doing that then.    Its kinda funny to think that 50 years ago my grandma was doing this same thing but the other way around! She came here from germany to marry my grandpa.  I am glad for that too because we have talked a lot about it, and i now have an insiders point of veiw on it.  And i know its not going to be easy.   I'm hoping that maybe i will be able to see my friend Helena again since i know she is living in germany now as well.  And hey girl.. if you are reading this.. let me know where you are and how to get ahold of you!  You can help me practice my german and i can help with your english.. lol.    Tonight is my cousin Corys coming home party!  i havent seen him in like six months so it will be good to see him again:)  he was in africa for the national guard doing a bunch of cool shit.    Anyway, i really need to keep updating these things now especially since i wont be around much anymore.    

Alright.. brace yourselves!  I'm glad we're all sitting down now..  i have something important to say.  This is the biggest decision i have ever made in my whole life..  I'm getting married.  Yup, i almost dont belive it myself to be honest!  Its very strange to think i will be a wife.. but also very cool:)  I am very happy and excited about it.  I feel that it cant come fast enough.  The lucky guy is Andre.. lol.  Well, maybe i should say i am the lucky one:)  Or okay, we both are!  Now, the thing is.. andre lives in Germany.  And yes, i still live here in michigan but that will be changing soon.  Like i said, not soon enough.  I really cant wait to get on with my life.  I want to start my life with him and be with my best friends.  I will be able to get my back fixed after we get married (which will be early nov. i guess.. not sure on an exact date) and then i can go to school!  i will learn german again:)  And i will also be able to work then too!  I will help him run his buisness (a Subway near to Hannover).  And down the road from now im sure i will get another job as well, after my german improves of course..lol.    I just told my mom about 2 hours ago.  That didnt go very well at all.  I didnt think it would but at the same time i didnt think she would be QUITE as mean as she was.  She doest believe me for one thing.. i wish she would only because its really going to happen.  And well, even i know its a crazy thing to do but i dont think its neccisary to put me down and laugh in my face either.  Anyway, im just really mad at her right now.  I know she will eventually get over it and so will i but in the meantime i cant stand to even be around her.  She said that anyone that cares about me at all will laugh in my face and say the same thing she did.  If thats true then im not going to bother even wasting my time telling anyone because i dont really care anymore about what other people think.  I cant.  Something that i cant get over though.. she always tries to make me feel so bad about myself by saying "you always do what you want to do!"  Well, what the fuck am i supposed to do!?  thats really want i want to know!  Am i supposed to do what SHE wants me to do?  Or wait, maybe what my dad wants me to do!  My sister?  my friends?  Hell no!  I am not living for anyone but myself until the day i have kids and you know what.. im NEVER going to please everyone.  never.  So why should i feel guilty about doing what i want to do?  That is really so fucked up!  I wish i would have said that to her in the moment too.  I didnt because all i could think was "no actually i really dont always do what i want to do"  Sure, i do sometimes.  Why wouldnt i?  But i think i should be doing what i want ALL the time.  If this is selfish.. well call me selfish then cuz im sick and tired of trying to do whats "right" for everyone else!  Now, i told my dad, step mom, and grandma this weekend up north.  Of course they were shocked and had many questions for me.. but thats why i love them so much.. they will be supportive and accept me no matter what i want to do.  I am way more like my dad in that way, and i love that.  I cant even say that he doesnt want me to go!  Because he knows that if i will be happy and i want this then i should do it.  That doesnt mean that he doesnt think its risky but he has at least a little trust in me as a person and i really wish that my mom was more like that.    Leaving my family will be so hard i know.  Marriage alone will not be easy, on top of moving 5,000 miles away and leaving everything you know behind.. but its what i feel is right for me.  So, good times, bad times.. i will make it in the end.  Hell, i always do!  And im also not so nieve to think that everything will be perfect and effortless.. it will take work.  But, its not impossible by any means:)  Not even for me.  I really have so much more to say.. but Erin is here now with dinner and we will be watching big brother and amazing race!  damn, ill miss that shit!  gotta take the bad with the good though!  life status: alive relationship staus: engaged (in a weird way without a ring..lol)

So today i got 100 percent on my last math test!  My first one too:)  Now i just have to study up for the final.  Now, THAT will be fun.. lol.  I will be spending the weekend up north with my dad, step mom, and grandma on our anual trip.  This will be the shortest period of time i have gone up though.. it kind of sucks.  I was thinking about maybe going tomorrow but i really should save the gas and go with my grandma.  AND it might be hard for me because i cant really do a whole lot this year (cuz of the piece of shit back) but it will still be fun.  Lots of relaxing, eating, cards, and of course fishing!  I hope i get more than i did last year.  My sister isnt able to go this year either so that will be a first, and that really sucks.  I wish she could go.. its a lot more fun then.  Oh well!  im off to bed.. had a long day of studying and testing and taking back cans .. 30 bucks baby!

I really need to write on this thing more.  I should have known.. or maybe i should say, i DID know that i wouldnt though..lol.  So typical of me!  Kinda like how i didnt end up getting my test done last week for whatever reason..    Anyway, today was a perfect day for the zoo, and a day at the zoo it was:)  I havent been to Potters Park in probably about 7 years or so.  It has changed a lot since then!  I went with my mom, sister in law, and two nefews.  My favortie babies in the whole wide world!  Hey maybe i can figure out how to put up pics on this thing like Christy did..  Ill try that soon:)  I was trying to put the pics from the zoo today on my computer but my mom took the batteries out of the camera so i guess it will have to wait.  So yeah we saw a lot of animals and i couldnt believe this .. but not only did i GO IN the petting zoo area.. i freaking pet a goat!  Thats a huge step for me, not being very fond of animals.  I really wanted to go on a camel ride but my mom said no:(  Of course i didnt have any money to pay for it so since she said no i couldnt go!  lol. sad huh?   But speaking of having no money..  on an awesome note, my parents came home from their weekend up north and had a shit load of beer bottles and cans in the garage!  Plus i had got the ones from my grandmas so im pretty excited to take them back tomorrow.  Now, i think after readin that myself i have decided THAT was sad.. lol.  Oh well, not much i can do about it right now.   I'm still waiting to hear from my caseworker or whatever about my court date for the medicaid appeal.  I hope i hear from them soon though cuz i really need to get my back fixed and get myself a job BAD.  I cant believe that its been almost FIVE months that i have been without a job!  that is so crazy to me.  the only time i have been off work that long in my life was when i was living in Germany!   Oh yes, Germany.  I try to not even think about it sometimes because every day it gets harder i think.  I miss that place SO SO much and my friends even more.  Now days i dont really have many friends that i go out with or even talk to.  Pretty much Tania and my sister, and thats about it!  I keep myself busy and happy though:)  I guess thats all that matters.  But, if i could be anywhere right now it would be in germany with my best friends.  Well, without the fucked up back!  lol.  Still i guess i would rather be there right now.  Okay, im done thinking about it.   math class status: 84% energy status: low    

So, its 1am on Wed. and i finally for the first time got a little sad about Tyson not being in my life anymore.  Before i was just really pissed off and didnt care.. lol.  But, it will pass soon.    I'm really excited about common ground tonight!  I get to use randys VIP tickets to go see Montgomery Gentry:)  Its gonna be fun.. im just starting to get into country but i have seen them on TV and heard some songs and they are pretty cool.  My friend Tania is going with me, and luckily i got a wheelchair too!  This is so great because now i dont have to worry about not being able to walk around or walking from the parking lot.  I'm just a little bummed though because i really was hoping that Andy was going to be able to go with me.  I know he likes country and i havent seen him in a long time, so i was really hoping he could go:(  I miss that guy.  I talked to him a couple times today though and we both agree that we need to get together soon.. so hopefully we actually will.  Unlike how me and Christy always say that and never actually do..lol.    I took a nap this afternoon and i was sleeping SO freaking hard!  It was unreal.. at one point my dream was so scary and real i tried to wake myself up but i couldnt!  This happens to me sometimes.. its really scary.  Then later the phone was ringing and i tried waking myself up again but i couldnt.. finally i did though and i felt exhausted like i had just did so much work..lol.  Weird shit man.  Well, guess im gonna get to bed here real soon.. im hoping i dont have a cracked out dream again cuz that is really scary sometimes.

So yeah, i havent talked to tyson in like 3 or 4 days.  I guess i am just supposed to assume that the relationship has ended, even though i hate doing that.  I told him to call me when he felt like talking to me and still hasnt done so.  To be honest im relly starting to not even care anymore.  Its really fucking gay that he gets so pissed off and so defensive every time i try telling him how i feel.  Its ridiculous actually.  This is all really too bad because i really did like him and i know hes a great person.  Not to mention the sex was really good!  I just wish that he was willing to put even a small amount of effort into our relationship.  I think its pretty stupid to think that you can go your whole life assuming everything is supposed to be so easy and effortless.  But i guess if thats what hes thinking, thats his own problem. I think i will call him and find out what the hell is going on.  Im really starting to get fed up with not having a job and being broke ALL the time.  I hate living on freaking pop cans..  I will be appealing the decision of the medicaid.  I hope to God it doesnt take as long as it did the first time!  Like ive said before.. i just want my life back and be able to do the things i used to or the things i want to do.  smoking status: quit

I hate today.  I hate when people are jerks and when they get mad for telling them how you feel.  I hate when they wont even try to understand, and when they wont listen.  I hate feeling hate most of all.  medicaid status: denied boyfriend status: who the fuck knows!

Countless memories And hot sweaty nights So many tears cried I just wonder why  Joints passed And drunken nights Many bus rides And still, I wonder why  A special friendship And past not forgotten I always tried But, please tell me why  My lasting love And broken heart Continue to cry Because I will never know why  Just this one wish Because of all we once had Look into my eyes And make my heart know why  I hate being without you And thinking of no more Part of me has died And only you know why

