The bus arrived a little after three in the afternoon.  It was an antique without the modern comforts like air conditioning and a restroom.  The ride was to be about 6 hours long.  I sat near the window right next to this huge woman who smelled strangely like spoiled meat.  Her skin glisened like she had been soaked in butter before being squeezed into her sun dress, or tarp, and placed on the bus.  In front of me was this man, who looked to be of Spanish origin and didn't speak English very well.  He fell asleep almost immediately upon boarding the bus and just sat there snoring.  Directly behind me was a spoiled young brat, who coincidentally didn't speak any english, that kicked the back of my seat with the strength of a full grown bull.  His mother, a beautiful young latina, read the magazine she brought with her and corrected him only when she caught me eyeing them.  I decided the best course of action would be to sleep for now and get off at the next stop, no matter where it was.  I settled into my seat and closed my eyes.  I felt the blissful feeling of sleep draw me away from the noise and musk of the inside of the cramped, hot bus.  In my dreams I felt myself freed, freed from all my inane responsibility, my joyless existance in what I had previously called my life.  I felt the sensation of forward movement, it felt good.  I was being drawn away from all of the bullshit that had clogged my mind and kept me from feeling truly alive.  I was awakened when the kicking coming from behind me stopped.  The woman sitting beside me struggled to free herself from her seat.  I giggled within at the thought that if I didn't help she would either die here, or have to naw off a limb.  I pushed her toward the isle with my sholder, she looked back and smiled.  Exiting the bus the sun greeted me with a powerful feeling of overwelming strength that humbled me.  Strangely enough there was a doctors office right across the street from the bus station, the parking lot was empty, but the sign in the window read open.  I entered silently, there was no receptionist at the desk and no sounds coming from the back.  I continued into the office, I heard familiar bumping and moaning coming from within one of the exam rooms.  The door was cracked and I pushed it open just a little more to improve my view.  The doctor and his receptionist had decided to take their lunch in  office, of each other.  His pants were around his ankles and she was leaning over the table.  She also had her top still on and her hair was tussed.  The doctor held a handful of her locks and tugged back with each thrust.  His exam bag sat right near the door I knelt down and picked it up, slowly, silently.  I withdrew with the same stealth that I had advanced.  I found the stockroom and filled the bag with all the various kinds of medications that I had grown accustom to identfying as "relaxing agents".  They had it all for such a small practice, way too much Demarol, Oxycodone, Darvon, Vicodin, Xanax.  They also had stimulants Dexedrine, and of course Ritalin.  I grabbed the bottles and pushed them into the bag, I listened for the moaning which continued.  I pushed the closet door up but not closed, and walked past the exam rooms and out of the door. 

 One day I couldn't anymore.  I had a nothing day at work, no operating, just a bunch of complaining assholes whining about mostly psychosomatic ailments seeking a magic prescription to cure their troubled lives.  I handled myself responsibly, tried my best to remedy their problems, and ended my day by sending my secretary home early and closing the office myself.  As I went about my daily drive home, the ground moved steadily beneath me.  The road gave off subtle sounds, thumping, grinding.  It was the same everyday.  I would go home eat some insipid trash my unalluring wife prepared.   Have quotidian sex and fall into a blank  dreamless  sleep.  This would go on day after day, I'd vowed to continue this until the day of my death.  The same defeated stares and gestures.  Forced smiles and dishonest emotions.  My drive took me past a bar I had never visited.  I pulled into the parking lot and shut off the car.  I sat staring at the sign for what seemed like half an hour, Big Sugar Bar and Grill.  The name made me laugh at loud at first, then the novelty faded.  I started walking towards the door, sitting right next to the door right outside Big Sugar's was a man with an outstretched hand.  He look towards me.  "Any spare change?"  His question stopped me in my tracks, I just looked at him, his pitiful state made me feel at the same time  forturnate and somehow trapped into my own circumstance.  I reached into my pocket and handed him all of the change I had.  I walked into the bar and the smell of tobacco and stale air smacked me in the face.  The barkeeper, a pale thick man, glanced at me but otherwise showed no interested.  I slid myself onto a stool at the bar.     "What'll you have?"  "Dewars White Label Neat."     He turned his back to me to pour the drink, I looked around, the room was nearly empty.  A middle aged waitress sat in one of the booths smoking a cigarette.  Her hair had fallen from a day of working within this still, humid environment.  It just hung lifeless, dark brown, softly falling on her shoulders.  She was lost in her thoughts.  She seemed to be of hasidic origin and wishing for someone, anyone, to come take her out of this.  I placed a 20 dollar bill on the bar and looked into my drink.  Off to my right there was a TV mounted on the wall playing the evening news with the sound turned down, yet an older gentleman at the end of the bar wouldn't take his eyes off of it.  I took a sip, it was good.  I had heard places like this often replaced top shelf liquors with cheaper types to save themselves money, by the look of this place making money would be a problem anyway.  I took out my cell phone and placed it on the bar.  I wanted to call her, I wanted to call home.  The bartender lit a cigarette.     "Hey, can I have one of those?"  He scowled but relented and held the pack in my direction with one extended.  I took it out.  "Thanks."  I said as he thrust a struck match into my face.     I had never smoked cigarettes before in my life, as was evident by the coughing that exploded from within me on my first draw.  I looked around and noticed that the waitress was looking at me, annoyed but not concerned.  The old man at the end of the bar didn't even flinch, I concluded he must be deaf.  I continued to drink and smoke until I finished both.  I felt my mind surge into an uncontrollable rage.  I knew at once what I must do.  As the bartender came over to refill my drink I hopped up and walked out of the door.  The cigarette had made me sort of dizzy but it improved by the time I reached my car.  I had spent about 30 minutes in the bar nursing my drink.  I pulled out of the bar and continued my way home.  My thoughts raced and got more chaotic the closer I got to home. I saw the turn that I always take to get on the street to go to my home, I saw the turn.  I see the turn.  I don't take it, I can't.  Not again, never again.  I drove, I just kept going straight.  Forever straight.   I drove until I ran out of gas about three and a half hours later.  I didn't know where I was I didn't care, I got of the car and I walked.  I walked into the endless open night.  I walked until the sun started to rise.  The subtle heat of early morning made me remove my tie and unbutton my shirt.  I removed them both and left them on the road,  about this time a car pulled up to the side of the road.   "Hey guy!!  Hey!!"   I looked into the window and saw two young men with smiles on their faces looking at me as if I wasn't real.   "Was that your car back there?"  "Yea." I responded without stopping.  "You need a ride?" the passenger asked.   I stopped walking and look into the car almost not believing what I had just heard.   "Yea...uh...Which way are you going?"   He pointed forward.   "We could drop you at a gas station or something, or we could bring you back to your car."  "That's ok."  I said as I approached the car.  "I'm not really headed anywhere."   The two looked at each other confused.   "Nah man, hop in and we'll drop you off."   They unlocked the doors and I relented and got in.   The passenger spun around in his seat.  "Hey, my names Jay, and this generous guy is Petey."  "Peter Matthews", the driver added.  "Thanks guys my names Viktor, but you can call me Doc."  "Ok Vic, here we go."   The car pulled off and I closed my eyes.  I felt like I had been walking for days, I suddendly thought of my cell phone sitting on the bar probably ringing non-stop annoying the early morning drinkers.  Or maybe the first time my wife called the bartender answered and told her that I had just left and was probably on the way home.  She was at home waiting, mad thinking that I was off with someone else.   "Where you headed Doc?" Jay asked   I really didn't know.   "East."  "How far?"  "As far as I can go.  Hey you guys got a cigarette?"  A smile spread across Jay's face.  "Nah, we aren't tobacco smokers  if you know what I mean."  "Oh, ok."  I slumped down into the seat.  I noticed that they were whispering about something then they noticed that I was wondering what.  "You want some bud?" Jay asked half expecting me to say no.  "Sure."   Now I had smoked weed last in college which seemed like a million years ago.  The familiar aroma filled the car almost immediately after I saw the lighter flash.  Peter glanced over at Jay and held his hand out to receive the cigarette, which Jay promply passed.  Peter quickly took two large drags and handed it back to Jay who slid around and passed it to me.  Now it wasn't my habit to imbibe in illegal drugs but I suppose I had turned my life in a new direction.  I took the joint and took a strong hit.  It was not very harsh yet it tingled my throat and made me want to cough.  I passed it back to Jay.   "Good bud huh?" Jay asked.  "Yep." I answered hand outstretched to receive it again.   Before I knew it I was getting stoned.  I think the guys had forgotten to drop me off, and were driving around town pointlessly.    "Maybe we should stop and get some breakfast" said Peter.   I was pretty high but didn't feel like eating.  My head was pulsing with good feeling and I felt myself drifting on every thought.    "Let's stop at Haliey's Diner, I heard that they have a special on waffles."   Jay was becoming a pain, it seemed like Peter indulged him without thought.   "Let me treat you guys to breakfast."  the words left my mouth before I knew what was happening.  "Hey, great!!"   Peter pulled into the parking lot of the run down diner.  The exterior was a chipped pale yellow that looked decades old.  As we walked in the smell of the place overtook me.  The aroma of good food like sausage intermingled with the potent smell of shit gave the place a familiar diner quality.  We took a seat in this booth, and the seats were as greasy as the table.  Our waitress walked over to take our orders.   "Hi guys," she said without a smile.  "Welcome to Haliey's I'm Karen, today's special is waffles, two eggs and a side of sausage.  Remember as always here at Haliey's the coffee's always on the house. "   I guess, as always, this spill was meant for usuals to the diner.  I had to try this free coffee.   "Just coffee for me, these guys will take two specials."  "Ok."  She snatched up the menus as if she just wasted her last breath.   Jay stared out of the window, intoxicated on something more than just weed.   "So where you from Vic?" Peter asked.  "Great Harbor, and could you call me Doc?"  "Oh, sorry.  So what do you do?"  "I'm actually a doctor, how about you?"  Peter looked at the floor.  "Me and Jay we're artists, in video, and we're on our way to L.A.  The long way."    The smile he gave me told me that they would probably never make it.  The food came incredibly fast, it looked hot and good.  I tasted the coffee it was incredible, well maybe I was still high.  The lack of coversation was refreshing, I decided to make my leave.  I placed a twenty on the table.   "We'll guys this is the end of the line."   I rose from the table, my timing couldn't be more convenient.  They tried to protest my leaving but with mouths full they couldn't say much.  I walked out of the doors and into the street. It was almost noon so the heat had really become harsh.  I thought about leaving, going somewhere more temperant.  I saw a pay phone and that urge raised up in me again.  I stuck my hand in my pocket and noticed that I didn't have any change, right next to the pay phone was a bus station, coincendence?  I walked into the station, it was empty except for the the man sleeping on the bench.  I walked over to the counter and saw a small blue haired lady,  barely visible, seated behind the metal grate.    "May I 'elp you." she asked with the type of strain that only came from countless years of repetitive speaking.  "Yes ma'am I would like to buy a ticked for the next bus going out of town." "Well the next one is the South Platte at two."  I handed her my credit card.  "Could you give me fifty cents to use the pay phone?"  She handed me the change.  I walked out to the phone, put the money in.  I wanted to call.  I had to call.

Passion call it lust.

I'd walk to the ends of the earth for you,   until the earth burns us away.   

    One of my poems with a picture I picked up off the net.  Posted by   Hello

    I need help Starting a website  Posted by   Hello

