Well today was my first day of college visits, and it took me to Cleveland, Vickie's hometown.  I went to John Carroll University and Case Western Reserve University, I am not a big fan of Cleveland. . .  But both campuses are very "unwired" and full of the latest WIFI technology, which is great.  Case, well. . . its a huge campus and a very prestigious school that is willing to give me lots of money which is always a good thing.  And, Case has this special turbo super fast internet.  The one thing I dont like about Case is the dorms; the dorms are very small and scary looking which is a major factor in my college decision.  JSU has slightly bigger dorms with carpet and the bathrooms looked alot cleaner.  Also the campus of JCU is more centralized and is easier accessed by these cool underground tunnel hallways.  (Plus they have a pool, and big exercise room, and better food)  As of now I couldn't tell you what college I want to go too but I am going t0 major in Biology, hoping to eventually go into Microbiology.  This summer is still ripe for lots of college visits which will hopefully take me to Miami, Kenyon, and maybe Ohio Northern, also I am going to try to get to some out of state colleges.  Also today I got out of the Republican Club that Alex has started. . . and I wasn't glad about that, hahaha, yeah right.  But I still want to keep going, for the campaigning part.  O well, there are more colleges to research on Princton Review, update later, maybe.

I got it...  Its a 3.  I am really extreamly disappointed in myself and feel as if I let Dr. Patterson and myself down.  I am not ashamed to admit it, I did cry when I saw it and now I feel really crappy.  I am just so mad at myself because I did so bad, and I would like to thank everyone for there support.  After about half an hour reflecting on my score and how I let myself down with my 3, I went outside and started a fire in our burning pit.  After it got to a big enough size, I gathered up all my AP notebooks that I had used for the text and threw them in, following with my notecards.  Watching them burn cheered me up quite a bit.  Finally I threw in the newspaper with Dr. Pattersons huge picture on it!  That topped it off, and I walked inside leaving the fire to burn.  I am still feel really bad, disappointed, and depressed, but that burning made me feel better.  Now I am worried about what people will think of me and my low score......... I know that I deserved to get a 4.

My scores arn't coming today.  So far almost everybody has gotten their score and Vickie got a 4!  She is alittle upset over it, even though it is a really good score and we are all happy for her.  In my opinion, the 4 shows that she isn't anal about history and actually led a live during the school year.  I am thinking that my score (the mail) might come around 1 o'clock so I am still hoping for a 4!    Wish me good luck.   For at least 2 more posts, I will be focusing on my AP score just because that is the most major part of my life right now. 

Scores not here yet.....  I have a pit in my stomach, and watch, they won't come. 

No AP History Score today...  I am one of four (that I know of) who did not recieve my score, which makes me more worried of what I will have to tell Satan (the teacher who taught HELL).  So far I have heard of all the expected scores from people, like all the ones who have 5s!  God I can't wait until I can drive; I am thinking about taking the test next week, then I will be free.  I can go places, like parties and peoples houses, without relying on other people.  FREEDOM!  Hopefully my license will jump start my social life, wait, it will have to create one first.  HMMM...  I think that will be it for now.  Its getting late, I will update tomorrow with hopefully more to type and I will report on the outcome of my AP scores!  The damn post office better deliver it or there will be hell to pay.         

