Yesterday was a very rough day.  I retreated inside of myself and almost couldn't get back out.  It took that special person in my life to show me things were going to be okay.  Now I realize how I should handle myself and my emotions.   My anxieties have been quelled for now.  Let's hope it stays that way.  Sometimes, I just like to know that people care about me.  Every once in awhile, I get this way.  Usually around my birthday.  It is the one time of year that I think of my life and how I feel about it.  This year, my birthday couldn't have come at a worse time.  Luckily, it is all over now.   That light at the end of the tunnel has appeared.  However small it may look, it is present none the less.  A speck of light can illuminate the darkest of tunnels. 

Well, I've been enlightened.  Perhaps it was the coffee this morning.  My last rant was exactly that, a rant.    I am a little miffed about the birthday thing, but hey, who wouldn't be.  Unfortunately, right now I have to see the bigger picture.    I am young, healthy, and amitious.  No matter what, I will be fine.  It is just a question of time.  For how long?  How strong do I have to be right now?  I have no rest.  When the end of the tunnel is pitch black, and has been for awhile, who can be so resilient as to see a light of hope.  Each time happiness seems within my grasp, it is TAKEN from me.  Yet, I still go further into the tunnel.  My logic is bunk, but my heart is big.  How long until my heart dies or my eyes forget the sight of light.  It is like an abusive relationship.  No matter how much it hurts me, I still keep going on exactly the same way.  Further and further down the dark tunnel...  Over time, it will all get better.  Over time, it will all get better.  Over time, it will all get better.  

Where to begin...   Last Wednesday was my birthday.  Nobody except my mother remembered it.  Not my boyfriend, most of my friends, and even my sisters.    Should my birthday mean so much to me?  After all, it is the day I arrived on this Earth.  It should be a day I celebrate, right?  Am I being selfish because I am sad that some of my favorite people forgot mention it, let alone send me a card or anything.    Here are some reasons why birthdays are fun for me:   1.  It is the one day that is focused on me.  2.  I like to know that people care enough to remember it.  3.  I like to feel appreciated at least one day out of the year.    The list can go on ad nauseum....   I shouldn't have to drop hints to get the most important people in my life to remember it.  I am not going to.  I will not forget that almost everyone didn't see it a priority enough to remember.  I would never ask for gifts, cards, money, etc.  I just wanted to go out with my friends and enjoy the day I was born.  Even if it was the corner bar and I bought my own drinks.  I just wanted to see that my friends and family cared enough to remember.  Furthermore, these sentiments have to come naturally.  If people really don't remember, who would want to remind them that they were supposed to celebrate your birthday with you?

Weddings.....Hmmm.....Where should I begin?   Recently, a couple of friends of mine tied the knot.  They currently reside close to me in San Francisco, but decided to have the wedding near the bride's home in Long Island, NY.  So, about 10 or more of our friends from San Francisco decided to truck on over to Long Island to see the whole shebang.  Well, for the most part, it was a VERY beautiful wedding.  The Service itself, the cocktail hour, the reception.....All GORGEOUS.  The hotel everyone had to stay in.....Well, that is another story all together.   What happens when a whole bunch of potheads and drunks (Terms on endearment really) plan the hotel arrangements???  Well, let me tell you!  It was anarchy.  Complete anarchy.  Firstly, the hotel was at least 40 minutes away from the hotel and required minivan transports driven by relatives to transfer people from one place to another.  This is a good idea in theory, but when you try to squeeze 12 people into a minivan with their luggage just because you don't want to drive another hour and a half roundtrip-things get a little cramped.   This isn't even the tip of the iceberg!!  There ended up being like 2 extra rooms that should've been checked out.  This didn't happen because nobody who planned the rooms had any idea what was going on.  Long story short: many friends of the wedding party were in distress a result of an 8:30am bout with each other over payment for the rooms.  This all could've been avoided with proper planning and communication.  Too many people involved in the planning were too passive aggressive to handle confronting people about money.  The saddest part, no one learned a lesson from this.  Why?  Because everyone thinks they are right.  Typical, really.  End result, my friend Andrew insisted I call the groom the day after the wedding....insisting that the groom's father told me to do it.  So, I called him and this is what he said: "Jerk!"  I felt badly enough calling them, but had there been proper planning this wouldn't have happened.  So, I spent a shitload of money, invested lots of time, wouldn't take payment for playing at the wedding (even though the other musicians got paid $100-150),  and had to pay for my own room just to be called a jerk!   Moral of the story:  If you are going to get married and expect a lot of people to travel for you, then pay for them.  It will insure everyone has a good time and isn't stressed about cash.  Don't make ten+ entry level workers drop close to at least $1500 (and that is erroring on the side of too little) over a couple of months to fly across the continent without very much financial support.  I understand budgets and stuff, but hey, it is easier for adults and families to do this than poor entry level workers.  Next time, make people come to you!  It's cheaper for everyone and would've been just as good a time.

The topic of the day: HOW MUCH DO STUDENT LOANS SUCK??     Personal tidbit: I was a flute performance major at a major conservatory of music.  My total student loans equal a whopping $40,000.  This yields a monthly payment of about $410.00/month.      Secondly, I no longer qualify for deferment.  I guess this is both good and bad.  Good because I am making more money, bad because deferments are more forgiving than forbearance!     However, I have yet another year of freedom from the responsibility of my student loans.  This is good with the pending new business endeavor.  With beginning my own business, I really don't have the money to dedicate to my colossal loan payment.   Thank you Oberlin for the yoke of debt you have placed upon my shoulders.  All of that propaganda and brainwashing really lined you pocketbook with my non-existent money.  Bravo.      

Hello and welcome to James in Flames.  I have created this blog to understand the world of human behavior though colloquial human feedback.  Today's topic: Relationships, How did this happen?      For the past 3 months or so, I have been romantically involved with my boyfriend.  Previously, I was single and tearin' up the town for at least 5 years.  Basically, I haven't committed my emotions to anyone for even longer than that.  Thus, my level of field experience in this area is next to nil.     So my questions to breeders and non-breeders: What makes your relationship work?  Even if it doesn't work all that well, how have you made it as far as you have??      So many times, I have observed couples argue and work through their problems or end nastily.   This begs the question: What happens when you're not observed?  How do things get handled after the Maginot line of public decency is routed?     Also, we have those couples who tend to genuinely be happy ALL OF THE TIME.  Is this possible?  Sometimes I wonder if this species of couple is living in blissfully oblivion.  If you disagree with this, I would certainly like to know!

This week has panned out to be especially tough.  I have been miffed by the suddenly deterioration of my relationship.  I can't understand what I've done to cause my relationship to go awry.  I was trying to be understanding, caring, giving, and loyal.  It was all for naught.  I guess when you think the other person likes you just as much as you like them, you had better make sure.  Otherwise, you end up with surprises.  I totally didn't see this coming.  It has been a bumpy road thus far, perhaps this will be a better solution...

Ever since I was a child, I have been a very impatient person. I simply lacked the ability to wait. Over time, I've been forced to learn to be patient. In learning this, I've also realized why I never liked waiting. For me, waiting is painful. I feel abandoned and discarded when I wait. Do good things really come to those who wait? How does one convince himself that waiting is okay? How does one cope with waiting when there appears to be no end in sight? All of these are questions I wish I knew the answers to. Like everything else, this too will pass.

