Currently drinking a can of Sprite (Sprite keep me in mind for a sponsorship deal, when I win Idol, ok).   Today there is going to be a lot on tv, we have the results of the wildcard episode of Last Comic Standing (Go Ant), we also have a live eviction of a contestant on Big Brother 5 and a new Head of Household competition, and we also get the second episode of Studio 7, we also find out who will join Amadu(don't know how to spell) in the Final 7.   I was watching Housecalls(with Gretchen and Marcelles and special guest Lisa) on the Big Brother 5 site and they were saying that Scott was considering voting Holly off which means Adria would stay in the house, yah!  Although I kinda like Holly, I like Adria that much more.   Guess what?  Jennifer aka Nakomis is dieing her hair again, first it was purple, then green, then she mohawked it and now she is making the couragous color of orange.   Canadian Idol is also on tonight, keep your fingers crossed hopefully niether Jacob or Elena are voted off.  Jacob is safe though because he had the performance of the night yesterday with David Bowie's "Space Oddity", Elena I am bit more worried about because she bomb on Cat Steven's "The First Cut Is The Deepest", but according to many sources she didn't have the worst preformance of the night, which means she should survive.  BTW: Studio 7 execs if your reading this, give Amy a second chance, please, ty.

How dare that Drew nominate Adria, she was like a big sister to him.  Oh well I hope Adria can survive this cut against Holly.  I went to go visit my Aunt Joan at the hospital yesterday.  She is kinda sick and I hope she gets better.  Canadian Idol is on tonight with the Final 9, singing British Hits.  I hope Elena and Jacob choose good songs, who am I kidding they always choose good, no great, songs.  You know that Obama guy made me stay up till 12:37 so I could see the rest of Big Brother 5.  I hope Ant returns in the Last Comic Standing competition.  Back to Big Brother 5, I use to like Holly, Scott, and Jase for a little while but now they are just being mean and manipulative.  I hope Marvin wakes up and doesn't vote with the 'Four Horseman' or the 'Santa Monica Van Boys/Crew', I hope he sides with the 'Gay Mafia' which is lead by Will, Diane, and Adria, which also includes Jennifer(aka Nakomis) and Karen.  Which at one time had Mike and Lori in it, but they are gone now and probably never gonna return.  Only the good die young.

I was watching Ashlee Simpson on Ryan Seacreast and she sang "Pieces of Me" live and it was only ok, at best.  I know she is a good songwriter and very good in the recording studio, but she isn't that good live, on tv anyways.  Maybe being there in person would help, but I doubt it.

Canadian Idol     Big Brother 5      Last Comic Standing    Let's wait and find out!

I want to move to Japan it looks so fun and lively.  I am also considering making a fashion line with some Orient influence, that would be so cool, but I doubt I will.

I love Big Brother 5, don't know why I couldn't get into the previous seasons.  Well anyways Karen made pie, she is so nifty, Holly was amazed and Nakomis was unmoved.  I want Will to win, I want Holly to be evicted out of the two nominees, but I really really want Jase out of that house.   Be sure to watch House Calls with Gretchen and Marcelles, they are so funny and fabulous.

Be sure to vote for Elena Juatco in Canadian Idol, because she is my new love and she sings great, I will post some mp3's of hers so that you can fall in love to, lol.  Rock The Vote 2004!  Vote Kerry/Edwards mainly because my name is in it.

I am currently making Banana Bread for summer school tomorrow.  So look forward to that.  What's that smell?  Hope it isn't burning.  *Runs away from computer*, lol!

I recently finished watching "Uptown Girls" and it wasn't as good as I thought it would be, which is sorta like "Love Actually", which I thought it was going to be great, but also turned out with only a C-grade.  Side note Kelly Clarkson had the theme song to Love Actually and now she gets the theme song of the Princess Diaries 2 (Breakaway).  Cosima De Vito is releasing her debut single, "When The War Is Over", August 9th, go buy it!

I have been trying to like Alanis Morissette, but I never can seem to.  I think I like her music, but it is sometimes hard.  Oh well work on that later.  I just went out and purchased Ashlee's album and it is much better then I thought it would be, the only problem that I see with it is that Ashlee didn't want to be pop and the album ended up rock/pop, but thats ok because I love pop.  I give the album a 8.5/10.  I suggest you buy it and listen to it over and over again, Lord knows I have. 

Welcome to my web blog, got kinda bored so I created it.  Now I get to post random thoughts whenever I think of them online, yah!  Stay tuned for, hopefully, many updates.

Happy Sweet 16 to me, happy sweet 16 to me, etc...., well, this birthday was kind of a disappointment, but I got Dance Dance Revolution and it's really cool.  I like dancing to Rain of Sorrow a lot.  I also got Josie and The Pussycats soundtrack for my bday and thats a cool gift and I got concert tickets to American Idol 3 Live, which is tonight, can't wait.  I am also getting some music equipment so I can write some songs and release an album by 2007, if I am lucky.  Tonight, which I am gonna miss because of the concert, Big Brother has a live eviction and Head of Household competition, go Karen, Will, Nakomis, Adria, Natalie, and Diane.  Either Scott or Marvin will be evicted, I really don't care which one it is, I rather have Scott go, but it doesn't really matter.  Also on TV tonight is Last Comic Standing, which in this round it will go from 6 comics to three, go Kathleen.  Also tonight is a live elimination on Canadian Idol, where they will get rid of another wannabe.  I hope Elena and Jacob survive another round.  Peace, Love, and Song ~Ed

