A 28-year-old working as labourer died while three others were injured after a wall collapsed on Thursday afternoon. The incident took place while the restoration work of an old nullah near Jaipur Junction was underway. 
As the wall collapsed, the three injured labourers were found trapped and stuck amid debris while the deceased got buried a few feet beneath the debris resulting in his death. He was rescued after half an hour of rescue efforts and by that time because of diminishing oxygen level and injuries, the labourer succumbed.  
To avert any accidents with monsoon underway, restoration and maintenance work of an old nullah passing from the junction and near the Ram Mandir area had been initiated. “For the work, certain parts of the nullah had to be dug up as well. There were several people working at the site. One part of the nallah had a stone wall and while the work was going on, it is suspected that the footing of the wall became loose. As a result the wall collapsed on four labourers working at the spot. Some part of the nullah also caved in and two women and two men got buried in the debris,” officials said.
The other labourers raised an alarm as the wall collapsed and rushed to rescue those who got buried. “Officials from the GRP, local police station, volunteers of the civil defence team rushed to the spot and sped the rescue efforts.
Three people were rescued easily, however, due to the amount of debris and mud that caved in, a JCB machine had to be pressed into action which removed the remaining debris. The rescue operation lasted for over two hours,” officials said.
The deceased labourer has been identified as one Pakkalal . “The man was immediately rushed to hospital, but  was declared dead by the doctors. Meanwhile, the two women and one man who were also buried under the debris are undergoing treatment. Their condition is said to be stable and their families have been informed about the incident. Further action in the matter is being taken,” officials said. 
