On Monday night, fumigation gas accidentally leaked in the pediatric intensive care unit (ICU) of the Mathuradas Mathur Hospital in Jodhpur allegedly resulting in the death of a kid who was undergoing treatment. Panicked parents and hospital staff rushed with the kids outside the ICU after it was shrouded in gas following the leak, sources said. 
While the children were shifted to other wards, family members of a child named Sundar who passed away the same night when the accident took place have blamed his death on the hospital’s mismanagement. The hospital authorities, however, said that the kid did not die of inhaling the toxic gas. 
The kid’s family created a ruckus at the hospital following which the police had to be called in. 
According to sources, a bottle of chemical kept for the fumigation of the ICU at the Mathuradas Mathur Hospital fell down from the closet. The bottle of chemical escaped the staff’s notice resulting in the spread of its hazardous contents. It is believed that the chemical stored in the bottle came into contact with water triggering a release of toxic gas which filled inside the ICU. 
Since the patients being treated were kids, parents and staff rushed them to safety as soon as the matter was reported. “All children were taken to the nearby Swine flu ward, with immediate effect,” a hospital official said. However, a child named Sundar, who was admitted just two days back in the ICU passed away around the same time Monday night. The incident led to berserk parents questioning the hospital’s administration. The police reached the spot and initiated an investigation into the deceased child. It was a narrow escape for other kids as well. Sources said that in the ICU wards 10 to 12, which were among the affected, some of the children were on the ventilator. Dr. Pramod Sharma, Head of Department of Pediatric Diseases, refused to attribute the death of the child on the accident at the ICU. He said that the condition of the kid who passed away was already serious. “The child’s death was not due to gas leak,” he said. However, his death occurred during the leak. After the ruckus, relatives of Sundar took his dead body and left hospital for village at night.
A bottle of chemical kept for fumigation of the ICU at the Mathuradas Mathur Hospital fell down from the closet. It is believed that the chemical stored in the bottle came into contact with water triggering a release of toxic gas inside the ICU. 
