A physical Training Instructor (PTI) posted with the government upper primary school in Kudi, Jodhpur, died at the Bhopalgarh Hospital where he was undergoing treatment for severe injuries sustained in an attack Sunday night.
Shyam Sunder Jat, in his role of a referee, had ruled a point in favour of a team in a women’s kabaddi match on Sunday. The decision had infuriated the other team so much that some of the villagers fatally beat up the PTI when he was returning home from the match.
The incident, according to cops, took place at Kudi village in Bhopalgarh area of Jodhpur late on Sunday night. “Shyam Sunder was officiating as a referee at the 63rd state-level girls’ Kabaddi competition on Sunday,” an investigating official said. The sporting event was held at the Shaheed Babulal government middle school in Kudi. “During a match of the 17-yr-old girls, Shyam Sunder was called in to settle a dispute between the two teams,” The official added.
However, even after Shyam Sunder reportedly settled the dispute, there was strong protest from one of the teams that felt that his decision wasn’t justified. However, the locals and the other school staff convinced the team members and the competition resumed. Sources said that after the event, one of the village youths confronted the deceased over the decision.
“In the evening, however, he was attached with sticks and batons by a group of people,” the police officer said. The attack was brutal and left Shyam Sunder grievously injured. People from the nearby areas rushed the bleeding teacher to the nearest Bhopalgarh Hospital. “He passed away Monday morning after succumbing to the injuries,” an official said.  
Since his death, there is palpable tension in the village Kudi. Agitated villagers are demanding justice for the deceased teacher. Police has called for reinforcements and additional men in khaki have laid siege to the village to prevent any deterioration in law and order.
The incident took place at Kudi village in Bhopalgarh area of Jodhpur late on Sunday night. Shyam Sunder was officiating as referee at the 63rd state-level girls’ Kabaddi competition on Sunday. In his role of a referee, he had ruled a point in favour of a team in a women’s match which infuriated the other team.  
