Two children of a Mahadalit family in Bihar's Buxar district have reportedly died for want of food, but the government has refuted the allegation. After the family made the claim that the children, aged two and five, died because of hunger, the state said that the death was due to illness.
While the incident took place in a Musahar colony in Koransarai panchayat of Buxar's Dumraon block last week, it came to light late on Tuesday. Dhana Devi, the mother of the two kids, in the presence of her other children, told local media persons, "My children died because they did not get anything to eat. My five-year-old boy died on August 26 and the two-year-old girl died on September 1". She added that she was concerned about her other children.
Devi's husband Shiv Kumar, the sole earning member of the family, was arrested by the police in May on charges of disrupting administrative functioning. "He was part of a group blocking the village road after the death of a villager in a road accident. At the time, the cops arrested around 20 persons. Some of them got bail, but we could not furnish the bail money," Devi said.
A source added that for the last few months, Devi's family had not received the monthly rations, as they did not have any Aadhaar number to link with the Public Distribution System ration card. "After Kumar's arrest, some of the villagers helped the family now and then, but everyone in the Musahar locality is in the same situation with very little to spare," the source added.
The district administration has ordered an inquiry into the matter though they have refuted Devi's claims that her children died due to hunger. "Both deaths have been due to encephalitis. A doctor has also checked the remaining family members and they are healthy," said Buxar district magistrate Raghvendra Singh. Another official Harendra Ram said, "I have met the family members and the mother had told me that her children died due to recurring fever."
Bihar Rural Development Minister Shravan Kumar told reporters, "If the deaths were due to starvation, other family members too would have been ill. But they are fine. It is bizarre logic."
Some RJD leaders, including Jagdanand Singh, Shiv Chandra Ram and Alok Mehta visited the village on Wednesday and met Devi and her family members. Earlier, Leader of the Opposition in Bihar Legislative Assembly Tejashwi Prasad Yadav had attacked the government over the incident saying, "The government does not have any agenda to alleviate poverty. Their focus is on saving their chair and not the development of the people."
