Even as a debate is on to put restrictions on the social media, the Uttar Pradesh Police cracked a mysterious case, relating to a married woman who faked her death to marry her paramour in Bara Banki district, with the help of her Facebook account.
The police traced her in Delhi and have arrested her along with her new husband. Her father was also booked for lodging a fake FIR against her first husband and in-laws under the Dowry Act.
A resident of Safdarganj area in Bara Banki district of Uttar Pradesh, Rubi was married to Rahul in January 2016. But her marriage did not work after her husband found that she was still keeping in touch with her ex-lover.
Neighbours said that the couple was often engaged in fights over the issue.
In June this year, Rubi mysteriously disappeared from her husband's house forcing her father Hari Prasad to lodge a complaint with the Safdarganj Police Station that she was suspected to be killed by Rahul and his parents for want of more dowry.
The father alleged that her husband and in-laws used to torture for bringing more dowry and never allowed him to meet her. The father suspected that she was killed by her in-laws and the body was dumped without informing them.
The police investigated her father's complaint but failed to trace her body after grilling the accused who kept on pleading that she left the house on her own without informing anyone.
After the finding the case suspected to be fake, the police closed the case. Rubi's father then approached the court, which directed the police to lodge a fresh case and launch an investigation again.
During their investigation, the police found that her Facebook account was active and pictures and messages were being posted on regular intervals. They took help from the cyber cell and monitored her account and mobile number for two months.
Her location was finally tracked down to Delhi. "We rushed a team to Delhi and arrested her from the location where she was residing with her new husband Ramu," VP Srivastava, the Superintendent of Police, Bara Banki, told the media.
They were brought to Bara Banki. During her interrogation, Rubi admitted that she had plotted her own murder and faked her death to live with Ramu. She told the police that she eloped with Ramu and settled in Delhi. She was also in touch with her father to frame a fake dowry death case against her first husband and in-laws.
The Police have withdrawn cases against her first husband Rahul and in-laws and registered a case against Rubi and her father for faking her death, and misleading the police by registering fake cases.
The Bara Banki Police admitted that they had reached a dead end in the case but Rubi's Facebook account gave them a crucial lead to crack the case. "It was a mysterious case, which we solved with the help of the cyber cell by tracking her Facebook account," said SP Bara Banki.

