Six persons, all brothers, allegedly lynched a 16-year-old on Tuesday on the suspicion of committing theft in their home in northwest Delhi's Mukundpur area on Tuesday morning. Police have arrested two brothers – Nand and Raj Kishore – while the remaining four – Triveni, Deshraj, Sant Lal and Sohan Lal – are on the run.
Residents of the narrow lane in Burari woke up to a commotion as a crowd gathered around the body of a 16-year-old lying next to an exposed gutter. Most of the houses in the crammed lane have exposed brick work and pathway is overhung by cables.
Police said that the brothers caught the victim, whose name has not been released since he is minor, stealing from their house and thrashed him up. Heavy police presence was deployed in the area after the incident.
The incident took place at around 3.30 am but police say they were only informed by around 6.30 am. "We received a call saying the residents of Mukundpur have caught a thief," said Aslam Khan, deputy commissioner of police (Northwest), "When the team reached the spot, they found a teenager lying unconscious near a drain. He was rushed to a nearby hospital, which declared him brought dead in arrival."The police are investigating why they were alerted after a long gap of three years.
"We have arrested two men, Rajkumar and Nand Kishor, who allegedly thrashed the boy for entering their house and stealing valuables We are trying to find out what the accused did with the victim for three hours," said Khan, adding, "We found the accused's phone in the deceased's pocket. A case under Section 304 (Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder) of the Indian Penal Code has been registered at Bhalaswa Dairy police station."
A case of trespassing and theft has been registered against the deceased.
According to Mushahid, the dead teen's elder brother, he was informed about the incident by neighbours at around 7 am. The family says the boy was not a thief and the fatal attack was instigated by another reason.
"I rushed to the other lane where my brother was found," says Mushahid, who works as a plumber. "He had cut marks on his body and marks on his hands that indicated he had been tied up. There were bruises on the legs and arms. When I saw him last night, which was the last time I saw him, he was wearing a black vest. But he was found wearing a white vest."
Police have added Section 201 (causing disappearance of evidence of offence, or giving false information to screen offender) and 34 34 (Acts done by several persons in furtherance of common intention) of the IPC to probe tampering with evidence. Autopsy reports of the teenager are awaited to ascertain injury details, police said.
Locals claimed that they found out about the incident in the morning and did not hear any sounds of scuffle at night.
"I came out of my house and saw a crowd in the lane outside," says Rita a neighbour. "When I inquired what the commotion was about, I found that a boy was lying dead outside a house. His clothes were torn and he had bruises on his thighs and several other parts of his body. People informed me that he had been beaten for suspicion of theft but we didn't hear any ruckus at night."
