The final preparations to bury DMK chief M Karunanidhi are underway at Anna Memorial on Marina beach in Chennai. He will be buried with full state honours on Wednesday evening. A 94-year old Karunanidhi died last evening after a prolonged illness.
The Madras High Court allowed the burial of DMK chief on the Marina Beach after the AIADMK government rejected its request for allowing the burial of Karunanidhi on the famed Marina sands alongside his mentor and former chief minister C N Annadurai.
The construction of burial spot at Marina is underway, while the casket in which he will be laid to rest is ready. 
"A person who continued to work without rest, now takes rest," is written on the casket.
Construction of burial at Chennai's Marina beach for #Karunanidhi, underway. #TamilNadu pic.twitter.com/fQLnkyNpFs
Meanwhile, DMK working president MK Stalin made a fervent plea to party cadre at Rajaji Hall to maintain calm.
His appeal comes in the wake of reports that two persons died and several injured there due to the commotion. Blaming the government for the chaos, he said that the government planned to create a volatile situation by refusing land at Marina. But the battle has been won in the courts.
"I touch your feet and plead not to create any disturbances and cooperate. Don't come near the staircase at Rajaji Hall where Karunanidhi's body will be kept in state," he said.
Shouts of "vendum vendum, Marina vendum (we want Marina)" had greeted Chief Minister K Palaniswamy earlier in the day when he arrived at the stately Rajaji Hall to pay his tributes to one of the tallest Dravidian leaders of modern times.
Apart from Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Chief Minister Palaniswamy, his Deputy O Panneerselvam, Congress Chief Rahul Gandhi, Lok Sabha Deputy Speaker M Thambidurai, senior state ministers, AMMK leader and RK Nagar MLA TTV Dhinakaran, superstars Rajinikanth and Kamal Haasan paid their respect.
Barring a few pedestrians and some private vehicles, the streets of Chennai were deserted. All shops and business establishments were closed, with the occasional noise of police vehicles whizzing past breaking the ubiquitous silence.
