One more city dweller died in July, due to leptospirosis. While the epidemiology cell of BMC's public health department, haven't received any details about the second leptospirosis death in the month of July this year, the teenager was admitted to a private hospital in Malad.
A 16-year-old Kandivali resident Tanmay Pradnye, died on July 28, due to leptospirosis in a private hospital. He was admitted to the private hospital for a week and was on ventilator.
While city witnessed three leptospirosis deaths in the last week of June, two more occurred in the month of July, but is yet to be confirmed by the epidemiological death committee.
As per information given by the neighbours, Tanmay had recently taken admission in Goregaon's Patkar College after scoring 70 per cent in SSC exam. Tanmay's neighbor Kishor Rane, said, "For the past few days Tanmay was suffering from body pain, diarrhea, and vomiting. He was admitted to two private hospitals for treatment since the first one was not well-equipped."
According to Dr Padmaja Keskar, executive health officer, the leptospirosis death of Tanmay is still not registered with the BMC's public health department.
A doctor from Siddhivinayak Hospital, said, "He was admitted to the hospital on July 24. After two days of treatment, he started suffering from multi-organ failure and his condition started deteriorating. He was later put on ventilator. He died on Saturday morning."
Earlier in July, one Worli-based 17-year-old died due to leptospirosis in the tertiary care hospital of BMC. His clinical history stated that he walked through flooded water and had gone on an outing at Worli seaface and other parts of the city during heavy rains. He had a fever on the third day and took treatment at BMC dispensary.
In the first two weeks of July, besides 19 leptospirosis cases, other monsoon-related cases include - 16 dengue cases, 192 malaria cases, 519 gastro cases, 49 hepatitis cases and two cholera cases. The report also states that between July 1 to 15, around 369 probable dengue-like illnesses were reported at civic-run hospitals across the city.

