Farhan Akhtar, Taapsee Pannu, Swara Bhasker, Kapil Sharma, Diljit Dosanjh, Ajay Devgn and several other Bollywood and television celebrities took to Twitter, on Friday, to express grief and shock over the tragic train mishap in Amritsar. 
At least 58 people were killed and 72 injured on Friday evening after a crowd of Dussehra revellers, that had spilled onto railway tracks while watching burning of Ravana effigy, was run over by a train. The incident occurred at Joda Phatak where at least 300 people had gathered to watch 'Ravana Dahan' at a ground adjacent to the railway tracks. 
As the effigy was lit and the fireworks went off, a section of the crowd started retreating towards the tracks where a large number of people were already standing to watch the event. However, two trains arrived from the opposite direction at the same time giving little opportunity to people to escape. Several people were mowed down by one of the trains.
Alia Bhatt
The #AmritsarTrainAccident is heartbreaking! Terrible terrible thing to have happened..This is just another example our extremely poor attitude towards caution and safety.. Prayers for all those suffering 
Farhan Akhtar
Saddened to hear about the loss of life in #Amritsar. Safety in public spaces HAS TO be taken a lot more seriously. Deepest condolences to all families affected by this tragedy.
Anil Kapoor
A tragic incident that could have been avoided if only. Sending my thoughts and prayers to the families of the deceased and wishing a speedy recovery for the ones injured. #Amritsar
Swara Bhasker
Thoughts and prayers for the victims of the tragedy in #Amritsar and for their families.. this is SO tragic!!!! Devastating news on a festive day. #AmritsarTrainAccident Strength to and prayers for all the affected!
Divya Dutta
Terribly sad to hear about the #Amritsar train tragedy!! Deepest condolences to the families!
Diana Penty
Absolutely shocked at hearing the news of the #trainaccident in #Amritsar. I just cannot fathom how something like this could have happened. My deepest condolences to all the families that have lost their loved ones. Love and prayers 
Randeep Hooda
Such a sad and shocking train accident in #Amritsar condolences and strength to the families 
Diljit Dosanjh
Deeply Hurt and saddened by the terrible train tragedy in Amritsar. Its heart-wrenching. My deepest condolences to the families of victims. My prayers with the affected ones for quick recovery. 
Babul Supriyo
Anguished to hear about the #TrainAccident in Amritsar. My heart goes out to the families of the deceased and I pray for the injured to make a full recovery.
Hiten Tejwani
Deeper saddened by the tragic incident in #Amritsar ..prayers for the families of affected ..#PunjabTrainMishap ..
Taapsee Pannu
This hurts ..... all this. This is 2018... really .... https://t.co/vXK3JlZtZW
Kirron Kher
Very saddened at the horrific death of more than 50people on the railway track in ASR. It happened during the burning of Ravan on Dassehra. How could they have had this function next to railway tracks? Negligence is shocking. My heart goes out to the families that lost loved ones
Ajay Devgn
Pained to hear about the Amritsar train tragedy. Deepest condolences to the bereaved families.
Shatrughan Sinha
Shocked & saddened to hear about the Amritsar train tragedy. It seems so unfair for a horrific accident of this magnitude amidst celebrations of Dussehra. Providence has strange ways of throwing challenges at the humankind.
Kapil Sharma
 
Sonu Sood
So disturbed to see the visuals of #AmritsarTrainincident have no words to express how sad is the whole incident. Mere negligence could cost so many lives. Wish it was not true. May God give strength to the families who lost their loved ones. Wish this was not true
Ronit Roy
Terrible twist of fate. My heart and prayers go out to the victims and families of the #AmritsarTrainAccident .
Gippy Grewal
Extremely saddened by the train accident in Amritsar. My deepest condolences to the families of those who lost their loved ones and I pray that the injured recover quickly... Waheguru ji Mehar kario..
Gauahar Khan
Amritsar
Sophie Choudry
Extremely sad to hear about the tragic train accident in #Amritsar .. my condolences and prayers to all the families who have lost a loved one tonightThis should never have happened... We must prioritise safety in public spaces!
Vishal Dadlani
Can't believe what I just saw. Tears in my eyes as I type this! Thinking of the pain of the families of the deceased and the injured. May all those responsible pay the highest possible price for allowing this to happen.#AmritsarTrainAccident #DussehraTragedy https://t.co/jseoiGHO4T
Shekhar Kapur
Absolutely horrific tragedy. Heart goes to the kin of those that dies and injured. let’s not politicise this tragic event that has left more than 60 dead and huge numbers seriously injured .. obviously there will be an inquiry later #AmritsarTrainMishap #AmritsarTrainAccident
Adnan Sami
Extremely saddened to learn about the train tragedy in #Amritsar where many lives have been lost and injured. My deepest condolences to the families who lost dear ones. Prayers for everyone involved.
Sub Divisional Magistrate Amritsar Rajesh Sharma said 58 people have died and at least 72 injured have been admitted to Amritsar hospital. However, Raveen Thukral, media advisor to Chief Minister Amarinder Singh, put the number of dead at 40, adding the toll could rise.
