The episode of Bigg Boss 12 begins with Sreesanth explaining to Deepak his reason behind trying to erase his name from the scoreboard using his spit. He tries to clarify himself and says sorry to Deepak Thakur. They hug and make up. Deepak breaks down after hugging Sreesanth. Sree calms him down.
At 2:30 pm Sreesanth is crying bitterly in the washroom and Dipika Kakar asks him to come out . He comes out and Dipika sits with him and tells him that if he doesn’t want to indulge in the household politics he shouldn’t participate. It seems that Sree is upset with all the bad things that Surbhi had said against him.
At 4:30 pm Shivashish Mishra and Sourabh Patel ask for Romil’s help to take more carrots from Deepak before Saba and Somi intervene. Romil Chaudhary tries to convince Deepak. At 3:30 pm Saba tells Sourabh, Romil and Deepak that if Karanvir Bohra has less carrots, she will give her carrots to Sourabh. An argument follows.
At 3:45 pm, Anup Jalota tells Jasleen Matharu that he feels Shiv and KV seem to be strong in the current task. Bigg Boss announces the end of the task and asks the housemates to count the carrots they have and collect in the living area.
Sreesanth says that he expected Romil to come and fight with him over the spitting incident but instead Surbhi started acting smart there.
Dipika says Deepak’s team covered 34.06 kms on the treadmill, while Dipika’s team covered 33.08 km. Shivashish Mishra has the maximum number of carrots and hence he becomes the contender for captaincy along with Deepak.
Shiv asks Surbhi whom will she favour in case she has to choose between the two. She says may the best man win. In the evening, Surbhi and Deepak are seen having a conversation in the garden area. He says that he’s understood that relationships and self respect is at one side and the game is on the other side. They’re talking about Urvashi.
In the bedroom, Somi is shouting at Romil and says he shouldn’t have taken her name, if he wanted to give his carrots to Shiv. Both Saba and Somi are arguing with Romil on the same. Romil tries to justify himself saying that it wasn’t his call but that of Deepak. Deepak also butts in and says that he had given his word and all he cares about is the result, by hook or crook. Somi says that Depak has been extremely manipulative in the task. Somi cries after covering herself with a blanket.
On the other hand, Deepak tells Surbhi that Sreesanth had come to apologise to him for what he did and tells her about their conversation.
On Day 32, the Bigg Boss 12 housemates wake up to the tunes of Gupt Gupt song, which hints at the upcoming captaincy task. At 9:15 am, Deepak seeks support for becoming the captain from Jasleen and Sourabh. Urvashi tells Romil that she’s 100% sure that the captaincy task won’t be on the basis of voting of the housemates.
In the bedroom area, Romil and Sreesanth have a verbal fight over putting the trimmer on charge. Romil had taken Sree’s trimmer without asking for his permission and Sree just asked him to put it on charge. Romil takes it on his ego and says he won’t put it on charge.
Srishty tells Romil very politely that if he has taken the trimmer socket then he should put it back also. Romil challenges Sreesanth to do whatever he wants to do in front of him. Surbhi tells Deepak to ask Sree to broom a certain area instead of lying in his bed and warming it. Sreesanth refuses to do so saying that he is unwell and that his leg is paining. Deepak conveys the same to Surbhi. Surbhi asks Sree to suggest somebody’s name to broom the floor from dining area to the kitchen area. Sree says that’s not his job. Finally KV says he’ll do it in the evening.
In the afternoon, KV reads out the rules for captaincy task called Sansani khez secrets. Bigg Boss will display some secrets of the housemates one by one on the TV screen and Deepak and Shiv have to guess whose secret is it. After the secret is displayed, both Shiv and Deepak will get some time to discuss with the housemates and think about the answer. After some time, Bigg Boss will play the gong post which Shiv and Deepak will have to press the buzzer. Whoever presses the buzzer first will get the chance to answer first. If the guessed name is right, he will gain one point. Whoever is the first to get 5 points, wins the captaincy task to become the captain of the house. Surbhi will be the sanchalak of the task and will also be a participant. The housemates can give clues to guide or misguide the contenders in order to make their choice of contender win the captaincy
Romil tries to guide Deepak on how to go about the task. KV tells Shiv that nobody wants Deepak to be the captain and that he’s been trying to be the captain since day one but he has played well with his mind in the luxury budget task. Sree tells Deepak when his secret will come, he will remove one of his bands and wear it in his other hand to give him a clue.
The first secret is that this person unknowingly dated his colleague’s girlfriend which led to sour relationship between the two of them. When the gong goes, Shivashish presses the buzzer, and takes Sreesanth’s name. His guess is right and he wins a point.
Next secret is that this person learnt hurling abuses at the age of 4-5 years. All the housemates start looking at Surbhi. Surbhi says others in the house also use abusive language apart from her. Deepak asks Urvashi about what was her secret; Urvashi says it’s this only.
Shiv presses the buzzer and says Surbhi’s name. His guess is wrong. Next Deepak gets the chance to answer and he takes Urvashi’s name and his guess is right. Both Shiv and Deepak get one point each.
Next secret is – This person was in a relationship with a famous celebrity for a year and their current partner also doesn’t know about this fact. The housemates think it’s either Srishty or Jasleen or Anup Jalota. Shivashish asks Jasleen that if its her secret, then she should give a clue by her hair which she does. Shiv presses the buzzer and takes Jasleen’s name and he’s right and gains a point. Anup says that this secret is a bit wrong because he knew about it. Even Jasleen is shocked to know that Anup knew about this secret. Jasleen says that she wasn’t aware of the fact that he knew.
Deepak is hurt that Jasleen didn’t support him and tell him that it was her secret and calls Jasleen out on trying to be good with both of them.
At night Bigg Boss asks everyone to collect in the living area. Sree says that he won’t go and then asks what Surbhi said the previous time. KV says that she had said now that all the important and unimportant people are there, Bigg Boss can begin with the task. Sree takes it to heart and says that this is reason enough for him to fight it out with her. He gets up and goes to the living area, asking Surbhi to explain herself on what does she mean by ‘important and unimportant’?  A verbal spat ensues between the two.  Surbhi keeps on shouting and says that Sree is not important for her so she won’t explain herself.
The next secret reads - My ex-girlfriend got so jealous of my new girlfriend that she got my phone tapped and even tried to do jaadu tona on me. Shiv thinks its Romil, Anup says it’s Sourabh.
Deepak tells Sourabh that jaadu tona happens in a village only and he’s from a village so it has to be him. On the other hand Sree tells KV that it’s him. The gong goes, Deepak presses the buzzer and takes KV’s name. He’s right and gains a point. Now both Deepak and Shiv have two points each.
The episode comes to an end with glimpses of more shocking secrets to be unveiled tomorrow. Going by the inclination of the housemates, it seems pretty apparent that Shivashish will beat Deepak to become the next Captain of the house. Watch out for tomorrow’s episode to know who will win the Captaincy task and who will be sent to the kaalkothri.
