Salman Khan begins the Weekend Ka Vaar by giving a sneak peek into what happened inside the jail between Surbhi Rana and Sreesanth. He shows how she made the jail a living hell for Sreesanth. Salman declares that Surbhi was innocent and she did not smoke inside the bathroom. Surbhi tells Somi -Saba Khan and Deepak Thakur that Anup Jalota, Sreesanth and Jasleen Matharu plotted against her. 
Salman jokes about Romil Choudhary and Jasleen Matharu-Anup Jalota 'secrets', that got revealed in the secret task. He tells Deepak that Saba did try to help him in the captaincy task but he didn't pay heed. Later, he asks Sreesanth why did he quit the luxury budget task. He asks moderator Surbhi Rana to share her opinion. She tells Salman that she feels Sreesanth never really wanted to support Dipika Kakar and did all that just to garner everyone's attention. 
Salman asks all the contestants why did they gang up against Surbhi. Jasleen explains that when Sreesanth throws a fit, he just abuses the person concerned but when Surbhi gets angry she starts targeting everyone. Anup and Jasleen say that they are scared of Surbhi because she is very unpredictable in the way she conducts herself. 
Salman declares that Surbhi wasn't wrong and shows them the actual clip of the incident. Deepak and Shivashish Mishra realise that they were wrong in judging her on the basis of hearsay. Romil and Surbhi accuse Anup of manipulating everyone to achieve their ulterior motive of sending Surbhi to the jail. Salman asks all the contestants to take the name of the person who they think deserves to get punished. Majority of them vote for Surbhi.
She refuses to take the punishment after she sees a fish inside the torture room. She tells Salman that she is a vegetarian and won't be able to go inside the torture room. He asks her to nominate someone else on her behalf. She takes Jasleen's name. She also refuses to go inside. Jasleen says she feels she is unnecessarily being targeted. Salman asks Surbhi to convince someone. Romil voluntarily goes inside. 
Meanwhile, Dipika cries thinking of all the things Surbhi said about her. Inside the house, Jasleen tells Karanvir Bohra, Anup and Sreesanth that she is shocked that Dipika nominated her and not Surbhi. Sreesanth tells them that Surbhi had promised inside the jail that she will make Dipika the captain. He tells them that he will never let Dipika become the captain. 
