Last month, a Canadian man John Ford was arrested for illegally entering a gated community where celebrities like Kendall Jenner, Britney Spears, and Christina Aguilera reside. He pled guilty to the trespass charge and was ordered to stay away from the area. But then last week, Ford, re-entered and was spotted by Kendall’s security sitting in her backyard. It was only on Tuesday, when he came back and sat on the model’s front porch that the police managed to nab him. Kendall has had stalker issues in the past including with a 62-year-old man, who sent her threatening letters. She’s not the only one...
The X-Men star is no stranger to stalkers. A woman Katherine Thurston was so obsessed with Hugh Jackman that she wanted to marry the star. She waited for him outside his gym where she attacked him with an electric razor. Her reasoning was that she preferred the actor with a clean-shaven face. Hugh’s personal trainer intervened and managed to push the woman away from the star.
Back in 2011, Selena was stalked multiple times by a 48-year-old man, Thomas Brodnicki, who claimed he was her soul mate. She was granted a protection order from him. In 2014, he again tried to contact the star by sending her an email. Another man, Juan Garcia, was arrested after being found hanging outside her California home.  
Earlier this year, an obsessed Miley Cyrus fan travelled across the USA to meet the star. He took to social media to share that he knew her address and how to enter her home. He also said that there is a “most horrific act” that he needs to complete. Los Angeles Police Department found that he was in LA and took him into custody for further interrogation. 
In 2014, a man Joshua James Corbett broke into Sandra Bullock’s home. The actress immediately locked her bedroom door and called the police. The cops found pictures of the actress in his pockets, and a letter claiming him as her husband. He was later charged with 19 felonies including possession of machine guns in his home.  
In May, an intruder Eduardo Leon entered the singer’s house and spent about 12 hours inside. He reportedly told cops he was there “to have sex” Luckily, Rihanna was not at home at the time. Another stalker, Jonathan Whooper, was found outside her home. He tried to break into her house by throwing a chair through the glass door. He later returned to the site telling security, he was Rihanna’s future husband.
