Tamil film, Vada Chennai, directed by Vetrimaaran is the story of a fisherman from North Chennai, who falls prey to the trap set by a mafia gang, and doesn't even realise it. 
What happens to the fisherman later, is what the film captures. 
The film is a gripping tale which stars Dhanush, Samuthirakani, Kishore, Daniel Balaji, Andrea Jeremiah and Aishwarya Rajesh, who are stuck in the gritty, dark bowels of North Chennai.
Anbu (Dhanush) is a young carrom player who is hoping for a bright future and wants to stay away from the dark side of his neighbourhood. He aims at becoming a respectable government employee. Padma (Aishwarya Rajesh), on the other hand, is a young woman with a lot of spunk. She believes in standing on equal ground with men. Anbu and Padma then eventually fall in love. Later, Anbu is put in a situation where he is required to stand up for and speak up to protect his lover and her honour. There begins Anbu’s tryst with violence.
Hindustan Times has given the film 5 stars saying, "From the first shot of the film, director Vetrimaaran has managed to build suspense. This is not the kind where you wonder about the what, why and how every minute, but the suspense here is audience waiting with bated breath to see how a neighbourhood carrom player takes to violence. The film is built layer by layer. We see not just the plot unravel, but characters also evolve. The effects of greed, lust and envy on relationships that were forged to symbolise loyaltly is truly what makes Vada Chennai a terrific film."
The daily further in its review said, "The fight for the throne of a kingpin in any city is bloody, causes loss and becomes the feeding ground for betrayal. The way Vetrimaaran has presented this scenario- this fight to the top- will make Vada Chennai one of the classic gangster dramas of Tamil cinema.The thought and attention to detail by the director and cinematographer Velraj throughout the film adds stunning visual metaphors, each a pleasure on the silver screen when it is unveiled. Such stunning scenes accompanied by brilliant background score composed by Santhosh Narayanan results in bone-chilling moments. Vada Chennai is a bloody brilliant film laced with some bone chilling moments accompanied with ingenious music. The writing is breathtaking, the performance exemplary and the visuals are dark and deep."
Firstpost, on the other hand, has given the film 3.5 on 5.
In its review, the website wrote, "Vada Chennai is a layered, violent and mesmerising portrayal of  North Madras, the breeding ground of rowdies and its ambitious gang leaders, jockeying to take control. The film works for its multiple characters and terrific set of actors who bring them alive on screen.In the beginning you get the feel that Vada Chennai is another Tamil gangster story set in North Madras, but Vetrimaran’s direction and characterisation makes the film different and gripping. The director is able to recreate the North Madras area accurately with real locations including the port area, fishing boats and dialogues-laced with cuss words."
Praising actor Dhanush's performance, the portal further wrote, "Vada Chennai belongs to Dhanush, who is fantastic as Anbu— his characterisation is well etched by Vetrimaaran. There is heroism, and at the same time the character is believable. But it is director-turned-actor Ameer who steals the show as Rajan."
Vada Chennai is the first part of a three-part film. 
