Karanvir Bohra reads out the third clue as the captaincy task continues: 'The girl I fell in love with turned out to be a man. And, this happened twice.' Everyone gets surprised and starts making fun of Romil Choudhary and Sourabh Patel. Shivashish Mishra presses the buzzer first and takes Romil's name. Bigg Boss announces that he is right. Everyone starts pulling Romil's leg. 
Next clue appears on the screen: 'I was in serious relationships with two people at the same time in college.' Deepak Thakur takes Surbhi Rana's name and Bigg Boss declares he's right. Sreesanth starts making fun of her. 
'I have sacrificed a lot of my relationships for my love.' Deepak Thakur takes Sourabh Patel's name and loses. Shivashish takes Saba Khan's name and wins the captaincy. Bigg Boss declares Shivashish the new captain of the house. Deepak gets angry with Saba Khan for misleading him. She tells him that she did tell him later but he didn't pay heed. He denies. 
Deepak makes a huge scene out of it. Urvashi Vani sees Saba crying and goes and tells Deepak that she isn't lying. She says he may have missed it when she would have said it. Deepak gets angry and asks her not to ever speak to him even she can't take his side. Urvashi also vows not to speak to him. Surbhi tells Deepak that she never like Urvashi as she finds her weird. 
Bigg Boss gives two more clues and asks the contestants to guess the names of the remaining people. 'I did not complete my graduation'. Srishty admits that it's her. 'I saved myself from becoming a victim of casting couch'. Everyone guesses Dipika's name. She agrees. 
Sreesanth tells Jasleen Matharu, Anup Jalota, Dipika Kakar and Shivashish that this time they should send Surbhi Rana to the kaal-kothri. He tells them that he saw her smoking inside the bathroom. He says she has no qualities of being a moderator as not only is her tongue rough but she is also biased. 
Deepak goes and tells the same to Surbhi. She starts abusing Sreesanth and denies taking the cigarettes inside the bathroom. Next morning, Jasleen tells Romil and Anup that she caught Surbhi red-handed smoking in the bathroom. She tells them that once when she confronted Surbhi for smoking inside the bathroom, she hushed her. Deepak overhears their conversation and goes and tells Surbhi that he is really upset with her as she lied to him.
Surbhi starts howling and abusing Sreesanth for trying to assassinate her character. The entire house gets against her. Jasleen and Sourabh also get into a heated argument with her after she accuses them of being Sreesanth's boot-lickers. 
Saba and Somi try to console her. Jasleen tells Deepak that Saba is doing this to get into the good books of Surbhi. All the contestants decide to send Surbhi to the kaal-kothri. Saba opposes their decision and tells Jasleen that she should have had raised this matter when it had actually happened. She accuses Jasleen of unnecessarily finding reasons to send Surbhi to the jail. 
Romil goes and speaks to Surbhi. He tells her that she should not have had created such a scene. He says she was not required to abuse people if she knew she was right. Bigg Boss asks them to nominate the one who they feel deserves to go inside the kaal-kothri. Dipika, Sreesanth, Surbhi, Romil and Jasleen's names come forward. Bigg Boss asks Shivashish to announce the final names of the contestants who would go inside the prison.
He takes Romil, Sreesanth and Surbhi's names. Bigg Boss gives him the power to replace one person's name with someone else's. Shivashish saves Romil and decides to send Dipika inside the kaal-kothri. Sreesanth gets annoyed thinking he will have to share the prison with Surbhi. Meanwhile, she vows to make Sreesanth's life a living hell. 
