In the latest episode of Kumkum Bhagya, Abhi-Pragya are hiding from the goons. Goons are trying to search them. Abhi hears some noise and tells Pragya that there must be a village nearby. They move out and reach a village. Tarun, Neha, Abhi and Pragya are in the village. Tiger tells the goons to hide their swords because the head of the village is his Tau ji. 
Abhi and Pragya ask Neha and Tarun to wear villager’s clothes and hide in someone’s house. Goons see Abhi and Pragya. But they manage to run and hide again. Abhi hears about mass marriage happening there. The goons decide to kill them as soon as they find them.  
In another scene Aaliya is praying that Disha should not come there, but she comes there and asks for Abhi and Pragya. Aaliya asks her to run from there but goon snatches money bag from her and ties her. On the other hand, Pragya dresses up like a bride. Abhi says that she is looking beautiful. They both hear goons talking. Pragya tells Abhi to leave and go towards mandap.
Disha tells Tanu, why she called her here. She lied to her. Aaliya says why didn’t she use her mind and call the police. Disha says, 'I got message from kidnappers asking me not to call Police.' Aaliya argues with her. Disha thinks Dadi is outside and she hopes for her safety. 
Goons are about to come near Abhi and Pragya, but Tiger's chachi stops them and asks Abhi and Pragya to go and get married. She asks Tiger to go and meet Tau ji. 
Meanwhile, Dadi who is waiting outside gets an idea. Tanu argues with goon and tells him that he is a street side cheap goon, took money and not leaving them. Goon asks her not to distract him as he is counting money. Just then they hear the sound of Police jeep and panic.
Tiger's chachi ask Abhi and Pragya if they want to get married and says she will tell Tau ji to commence the rituals. She asks what they like in each other. Abhi says she is perfect and understanding but she has many bad points also. Pragya says he fears cockroach and fights with me. Chachi says these silly fights are common in any marriage and they are made for each other. 

To watch the latest episodes of all your other favourite shows – click here.
