American singer Ariana Grande belted out a big 'wicked' tune during her first public appearance since ending things with fiance Pete Davidson.
The "One Last Time" singer performed 'The Wizard and I' on Tuesday (local time) in a pre-taped TV special for the Broadway musical 'Wicked.' Grande assured of her presence at the event, even after the split with Davidson, and she delivered on her promise.
Taking to her Instagram story, she posted a now-deleted note with white text on a black background. "Ok today was very special and I'm so grateful that I was able to be there," she wrote.
This Instagram post was also the first time she outwardly addressed the end of her engagement as she added, "Time to say bye bye to the internet for just a lil bit. It's hard not to bump news and stuff that I'm not tryna to see right now."
"It's very sad and we're all trying very hard to keep going. Love u. and thank u for being here always," she continued.
On the other hand, Davidson was supposed to headline a comedy gig on Wednesday (local time) at Temple University but dropped out last minute. He is being replaced by Adam DeVine, confirmed TMZ.
The couple, after dating for a while, announced their engagement in May this year. In September, the comedian added another one to his ever-growing collection of tattoos, by copying one of Ariana Grande's.
However, it's no secret that the 'No Tears Left To Cry' singer hasn't been doing good emotionally, ever since her ex-boyfriend rapper Mac Miller passed away on September 7.
The singer has constantly been trying to stay away from public appearances. She recently pulled out of her scheduled performance at the F--k Cancer Gala at Warner Bros. Studios in Los Angeles.
Earlier this month, the singer skipped the 2018 Emmy awards besides also dropping out of the Saturday Night Live season 44 premiere.
Grande, a little while back, took to her Twitter handle to share with her fans that she was having "a tough month". "Can I pls have one okay day. just one. pls.," she wrote. She later added that she was "so tired."
