Actor Sohum Shah is currently riding high on the success and rave reviews for his critically acclaimed film 'Tumbbad'. The talented actor has put in tremendous effort for the film for six years and we can definitely say that Sohum's hard work has paid off well. Not only the audience, even the critics are hailing the film.
The film has received immense praise from Bollywood celebrities and also from celebrated filmmaker Rajkumar Hirani. Rajkumar Hirani took to his twitter handle and wrote,"#Tumbbad is a visually dazzling & amazing original film. A rollercoaster ride that will keep you on the edge of your seat. It must be enjoyed only on a big screen. @s0humshah".
Rajkumar Hirani had seen Tumbbad some months back, Interestingly Rajkumar Hirani, who is usually not very active on social media platforms took to his twitter handle and praised Tumbbad. And not just once, but now he has posted a message with an appreciation for the film even after its release.
Recently actors like Shah Rukh Khan, Hrithik Roshan, Rajkummar Rao, Arjun Kapoor, Sonakshi Sinha and Tiger Shroff too have showered their love on Sohum’s Tumbbad. Even one of the most celebrated filmmakers, Imtiaz Ali enthusiastically described the film as “a brilliant, enjoyable film. Never seen anything like this before.”
Interestingly, when Sohum showed the film to Aanand L Rai, he almost immediately came on board to present the film, describing it as a genre-defining one which will dazzle the audience and give one an unmissable theatrical experience.
Tumbbad has become a rage amongst the audience who have been posting on social media about how the film’s production and VFX quality is even better than some of the Hollywood productions. The comments from the audience are ranging from Tumbbad being called one of the greatest films ever made to a film that will be remembered and loved for a very long time.
#Tumbbad is a visually dazzling & amazing original film. A rollercoaster ride that will keep you on the edge of your seat. It must be enjoyed only on a big screen. @s0humshah
Tumbbad offers spectacular visuals which takes the audience on a trip to the interiors of ancient, cultural Maharashtra giving glimpses into the quintessential attires and lifestyle of Konkanasth Brahmans. Giving glimpses of fantasy, action, frights, and scares, Tumbbad is a horrific and thrilling experience that questions the roots of human greed while providing entertainment of the purest kind. 
The trailer of the film has left the audience gripped as Tumbbad presents an interesting mixture of mythology, fantasy and thriller leaving everyone with a spine-chilling experience. The much ambitious project has been roller coaster ride for Sohum Shah while Aanand L Rai defines the film as a genre-defining film. Tumbbad is successfully running across theaters since 12th October 2018.
