In the latest episode of Kumkum Bhagya, Pragya is thinking if she should tell Abhi the truth. Abhi says I don’t care for people who don’t matter to me. In another scene the Boss of the goons asks Aaliya to tell Abhi’s number so that he can call him to ask for ransom money. Aaliya says you will not get number or ransom money. Tanu tells Boss that she will call someone and ask him to arrange for the money.
On the other hand, Boss tells his men to kill Pragya, Neha and Tarun, but bring Abhi alive, as he needs to settle things with him. Informer calls the goons and gives Abhi-Pragya’s location to the goon. Tiger plans to go there but asks informer to keep following them. It’s the next morning, Abhi, Pragya, Neha and Tarun are still walking in the jungle and trying to find a way out.
Informer is also following them in the jungle. Abhi thanks Pragya for her plan and her mind. Pragya says that you never praise me, but never forget to humiliate me. Neha asks Pragya to thank him instead of fighting with Abhi again. Abhi defends Pragya and tells Neha, it’s me who keeps fighting not her! Neha asks Abhi how long they will have to walk. Abhi says a little more, according to the maps. Neha asks him to call for the taxi in the jungle only. He says they have to walk a bit. Boss brings Aaliya and Tanu to the haveli.
Meanwhile, Boss asks Tanu to call the person and ask to arrange money. Tanu says she will call Nikhil. Aaliya says that he won’t have such huge amount of money and calling him will only increase their problems. Tanu calls Purab, but he doesn’t pick the call. She then calls Disha and asks Aaliya to talk to her. Disha gives call to Dadi. Dadi says they are busy and ends the call. Tanu calls again and tells Disha that they all are kidnapped and acts as goons are shooting Pragya and asks not to kill her. Disha says that they are coming there to help them.
Abhi, Pragya and others walk in jungle. Abhi lifts Pragya as she is hurt and asks her not to talk in between. Pragya asks him to keep her down, and he is not a superman. Goons find all four in jungle. Pragya alerts Abhi, Abhi asks Tarun to take Neha and run for their life and asks him to take care of her. On the other hand, Abhi Pragya decide to hide and distract the goons.

To watch the latest episodes of all your other favourite shows – click here.
