Actress Neena Gupta, who has essayed roles on-screen that have challenged social norms, in real life, says that men became a priority and her focus shifted from career to finding the right partner.
The 64-year-old actress, who is known for her performance in TV shows, including Khandaan, Bharat Ek Khoj and Saans and films such as Woh Chokri, Gandhi and Muhafiz, says her desire to have a healthy relationship diverted her attention from work.
"I always wanted to do good work and play strong parts. But when I look back now, I feel men became my priority and it was a big mistake. My focus shifted from career to finding the right man. Men should never be the prime focus of women's life," Neena Gupta told PTI.
"I was doing really well. I was writing, directing and producing some great things on television. What I went through in personal life had a big impression on my professional choices," she added.
The veteran actress believes women are conditioned to keep their relationships above their personal goals.
"As women, we always crave for family and a loving partner and in our quest to find that happy space we overlook a lot of things. I now understand I should have prioritised things better," she added. 
The mother of famous designer, Masaba Gupta, Neena also went on to say that it is still hard for women to have a life they aspire to and be with a man who treats them as an individual.
"It is close to impossible to find a man who can bear with a woman, who is a notch above or equal to him. Such men are still not there in this world. It is like we will always be facing trouble in our lives. If we act strong it is a problem, and if we don't it is a problem. I don't know if any woman is completely happy with the way she leads her life or with the way people treat her," she further said.
The actress, however, believes #MeToo movement in India will change the status quo. 
"#MeToo has shaken the whole industry. But the sad part is that it is so hard to prove such incidents. I have been on my own for the longest time and have faced a lot of such incidents during my days in college, National School of Drama. I don't know how we can get a proof of a person groping us or touching us inappropriately. All we could do at that time was get used to it or try our best to avoid it," she said.
She hopes the movement will probably instill some fear in people who abuse their power.
"I am hopeful that some change will come. The movement will be able to instill some fear. But it will take time," she said. 
The actress, who will next be seen in Badhaai Ho, said to change the way men treat women, society, especially mothers, need to get rid of the patriarchal mindset.
"Men can only change if they are taught right things by their mothers. I hope the coming generations of men will be much more sensitive towards women. Sadly mothers of my age still have the same patriarchal mindset," she went on to say. 
Badhaai Ho, directed by Amit Sharma and also featuring Ayushmann Khurrana, Sanya Malhotra, Gajraj Rao, releases on October 18.
