Noted singer Shweta Pandit had recently launched fresh set of allegations against music composer Anu Malik while accusing him of sexual harassment.
Earlier, Sona Mohapatra had called out Kailash Kher for alleged sexual misconduct and had also hinted at Anu Malik being a 'serial predator'. 
While denying all the allegations against him, Anu Malik's lawyer, Zulfiquar Memon said that all the accusations are false and baseless.
He clarified saying, "The allegations made against my client (Anu Malik) are emphatically denied as completely false and baseless. My client respects the #metoo movementbut to use this movement to start a character assasination mission is obnoxious."
On Wednesday, in a long post on Twitter, Shweta Pandit shared her ordeal, accusing the composer of sexual misconduct back when she was just 15-years-old, calling him a pedophile.
The singer also thanked Sona Mohapatra for calling the music composer out and urged others who've been exploited by him, to speak up.
As per Shweta Pandit's post, the alleged incident took place back in the year 2001 when she was called by Anu Malik's manager for an audition to the studio. 
She was asked to sit in a small cabin, where she sang the title song of Har Dil Jo Pyaar Karega as a voice test for the composer. 
Post that, Shweta alleged that Anu Malik told her that he will give her a song with Shaan and Sunidhi Chauhan "...but first give me a kiss now". 
Sharing her #MeToo story on her Twitter account, she wrote, "Had to go back to my worst memory as a teenage girl today to write this and speak up - its now or never. This is my #MeToo and have to warn young girls about #AnuMalik & let you know your #TimesUp @IndiaMeToo Thank you @sonamohapatra for speaking up about him & supporting this"
For the uninitiated, the #MeToo movement started with Tanushree Dutta calling out Nana Patekar for sexually harassing her on the sets of the 2008 film Horm OK Pleasss. 
Since then, a number of women from all walks of life have come out on social media to name and shame the predators. 
Some of the names from B-Town that have been called out for alleged sexual misconduct include the likes of Sajid Khan, Rajat Kapoor, Alok Nath, Chetan Bhagat, Vikas Bahl among others.
