Five years since their last collaboration, Satyagraha (2013), Ajay Devgn and Prakash Jha are joining forces once again. An industry insider tells us that the two will team up for a realistic subject that the filmmaker has reportedly discussed with the actor. The latter has liked the subject and the former will develop it in the coming months before they decide when it will go on floors. 
“Ajay and Prakashji have collaborated for some interesting films inspired by real incidents. The new subject, too, is in that space and is relevant for the present times,” says our source. The Bollywood superstar, who will soon begin filming his ambitious historical venture, Taanaji, has a couple of projects — like Neeraj Pandey’s Chanakya, Boney Kapoor’s sports drama and Luv Ranjan’s romcom co-starring Ranbir Kapoor, apart from Indra Kumar’s Total Dhamaal and Akiv Ali’s De De Pyaar De, lined up for release in the coming months.
Ajay Devgn and Prakash Jha have had several successful collaborations such as:
In this romantic drama, Ajay is seen as Anand Kishore, a happily married man whose life takes a turn when he meets Nandita (Kajol). The film also featured Mahima Chaudhary. 
Ajay essayed the role of a police officer, Amit Kumar, who takes on the local don and his son. The movie won the National Award for Best Film on Other Social Issues in 2004. 
Ajay is seen as an honest man (Ajay Shastri) who resorts to abduction to repay his loan. The crime drama, which also starred Nana Patekar, depicted why kidnapping is a burning issue in Bihar.
The political thriller, which had a star-studded cast including Ranbir Kapoor, Nana Patekar, Arjun Rampal, Katrina Kaif, Manoj Bajpayee and Naseeruddin Shah was a modern-day adaptation of Mahabharata set against the backdrop of politics. Ajay portrayed the role of Karna aka Sooraj Kumar. 
Starring Amitabh Bachchan, Kareena Kapoor Khan, Arjun Rampal, Amrita Rao and Manoj Bajpayee, this political drama highlighted the fight against corruption. Ajay plays the role of Maanav, an ambitious capitalist who gives up everything to join the movement led by Amitabh.
