Bollywood actor Sushant Singh Rajput, on Friday morning, dismissed all sexual misconduct allegations against him by sharing screenshots of his text conversations with his 'Kizie Aur Manny' co-star Sanjana Sanghi. 
“The last thing worth doing is to defend yourself of the fiction created by an agenda. People using this much required campaign for their personal agenda is too much to ignore. So here is the text conversation with Sanjana till the time I shot for the film. I let you decide,” Sushant wrote in a tweet shared on Thursday night. He however deleted it, later.
The 32-year-old actor shared fresh screenshots on Friday morning. “I feel sad to reveal personal information but it seems that there is no other way to state what was, in the midst of this curated and well timed smear campaign. From the first till the last day of the shoot, this is what happened on the Set with Sanjana,” he wrote in his tweet.
I feel sad to reveal personal information but it seems that there is no other way to state what was, in the midst of this curated and well timed smear campaign. From the first till the last day of the shoot, this is what happened on the Set with Sanjana. (1/2) pic.twitter.com/oZXRkkMmo6
I feel sad to reveal personal information but it seems that there is no other way to state what was, in the midst of this curated and well timed smear campaign. From the first till the last day of the shoot, this is what happened on the Set with Sanjana. (2/2) pic.twitter.com/vTOcbSwada
The first text is from July 9 and the last text is from August 22. The screenshots show a friendly chat between Sushant and Sanjana where they are seen talking about the shoot, and their performances in general. 
Sushant's Twitter verification badge was said to have been taken away by Twitter India in light of the recent Me Too campaign. The actor clarified that his account has not had a blue tick since September 5. 
"And for all those deliberately using the missing of Twitter ‘blue tick’ to substantiate their false claims, allow me to tell you that it is not there since 5th of September. Get your facts checked before jumping to conclusions that you so eagerly want to," he wrote. 
And for all those deliberately using the missing of Twitter ‘blue tick’ to substantiate their false claims, allow me to tell you that it is not there since 5th of September. Get your facts checked before jumping to conclusions that you so eagerly want to. pic.twitter.com/9iIUWo8RKZ
Reports of the actor flirting with Sanjana and making her uncomfortable have been going around since a long time. It was also said that Ms Sanghi's parents had to intervene after director Mukesh Chhabra did not take a stand. 
A source had told DNAAfterHrs in August, this year, “Sushant was trying to be ‘extra-friendly’ towards newbie Sanjana Sanghi. On one occasion, she seemed to have got uncomfortable and apparently brought it to the notice of her parents, who reportedly told her to return to the set only if she felt she should. One hears that as of now, shooting has come to a standstill.”
The studio had however refuted all reports saying, “We, as a studio, take the safety of our talent and crew with utmost seriousness. No such incident has happened on our sets and shoot has not been suspended. As a matter of fact, the final schedule of our shoot is on as we speak. We are looking forward to releasing the film in 2019.”
Mukesh Chhabra tweeted in support of Sushant Singh Rajput. "I totally stand by Sushant Singh Rajput - no such incident happened on the sets and let's not have a Twitter trial and make an innocent person suffer for somebody else's ulterior motives I had clarified this on twitter long back and I still maintain it," he posted late on Thursday night. 
I totally stand by @itsSSR - no such incident happened on the sets and let's not have a Twitter trial and make an innocent person suffer for somebody else's ulterior motives I had clarified this on twitter long back and I still maintain it . https://t.co/aIzoEq0Xrj
Mukesh has been suspended from the post of director Kizie Aur Manny after he was named and shamed by two anonymous aspiring actresses in their #MeToo stories.
Producers Fox Star Hindi on Friday issued a statement saying: "As a responsible organisation, Star India takes any allegation of sexual harassment of women at workplace very seriously hence Fox Star Studios has suspended the services of Mukesh Chhabra, director of our film Kizie Aur Manny, which is under production, till the Internal Complaints Committee (ICC) of Mukesh Chhabra Casting Company concludes its inquiry into the allegations against him."
pic.twitter.com/R8yO04qsCG
Sanjana is yet to react to the allegations against Sushant. 
