In less than a fortnight, West Bengal will go to polls, with yet another five-year term for the three-tier panchayat system coming to an end. Even before the state could go to polls, the rural elections have been marked by unprecedented scenes of violence. Candidates from the three Opposition parties, the BJP, Left Front and the Congress, set to file their nominations, along with their entourage of supporters and party workers came across bloody scenes, interspersed with threat, intimidation at the end of a gun’s barrel, assault and even a few deaths.
Matters came to such a head that the Opposition parties had to knock on the doors of the Calcutta High Court to seek an extension on the last date for filing nomination, after the ruling party, Trinamool Congress, unleashed a wave of terror and violence across the state to keep them for filing nomination. 

Scenes of warring groups throwing bombs at each other flashed on live television, streets were splattered with blood, and lenses zoomed in on bodies lying still. 
Why Mamata Banerjee’s party decided to let loose such an orgy of violence despite having a clear majority in Bengal’s villages is a different chapter of discussion. For the uninitiated, however, this is not the first time panchayat polls in Bengal have been violent and bloody. Guns, bombs, and bloodshed are hardly new to the state’s often-visceral political algebra, where the formula of mayhem is a natural ‘a plus b whole square’, the means to an end. 
Even five years ago, the first three-tier rural polls held in the state after Trinamool came to power in 2011, was equally violent. The sights and sounds were not much different, blood-splattered, and covered in smoke from country bombs, amidst a backdrop of verdant country scenery. Similar scenes had unfurled even in 2008, the last panchayat polls under the Left. With the red brigade weakened in rural Bengal, post Singur and Nandigram debacles, it was only a matter of time the regime had to go. 
Some would argue violence is only a means for Trinamool to hold on to power. What these critics miss out on is the steady flow of funds entering rural Bengal for public projects. The need to hold on to power is not just political but also economic. In a culture of institutionalised corruption and organised loot, which planted deep roots during three decades of Left rule, the need for violence is to grab or retain control of these purse strings. The need to show strength is just a way to achieve that goal. 
If, for Mamata, it is important to prove her grasp over rural Bengal is still tight, for BJP it is crucial to find a chink in her armour. The BJP, which has emerged as the primary Opposition, finds significant electoral promise in Bengal, particularly for recorded discontent over illegal migration from Bangladesh and Banerjee’s almost unabashed mollycoddling of Muslims that has irked even the Bengali bhadralok. Armed with the hope that the ground is fertile enough to wrest power, the BJP is steadily working on setting up speed-breakers for Trinamool. 
Given that it takes two flint stones to create a spark, the violence is heightened because unlike the Congress or the Left, the BJP is not cowering down; they are keeping up the dance, matching Trinamool at every step. Also, with Lok Sabha elections scheduled for next year, all the parties are using the upcoming polls to run beta tests for electoral strategies. Although the nature of the rural elections and the General Elections are significantly different in the nature of voting patterns, the basic tenet of having to win at any cost remains the same. 
Apprehending that the BJP will continue to put up a tough fight, Trinamool drew the pre-poll battle plans. This finds further reflection in the fact that the ruling party decided to prevent opposition candidates from filing nominations, paving its own path to win thousands of seats uncontested, much before May 14, the day Bengal goes to a single-phase election. The State Election Commission has already declared Trinamool winner in around 34 percent of the seats across gram panchayats, panchayat samitis and zilla parishads. 
Rewinding to the original point of how the violence is mostly to ensure control over rural funds, the math seems rather simple. Besides, a plethora of Central and state schemes for local bodies, the World Bank sanctioned a $210 million loan in 2017 to strengthen projects in the state’s gram panchayats, the lowest tier of rural governance. Recommendations from the 14th Central Finance Commission and the 4th State Finance Commission have also made provisions that by 2020, funds to these local bodies will be double. This probably explains why in many parts of Bengal, Trinamool workers are celebrating, even before the first vote has been cast. 
The writer is a Kolkata-based journalist. Views are personal 
