Decades after his death, Muhammad Ali Jinnah, the strongest proponent of the two-nation theory, and the father of Pakistan, continues to have a polarising effect in India. Large-scale communal riots in the wake of the Partition coupled with the biggest human displacement in contemporary history, have left indelible scars in the hearts of the people. For many Indians, Jinnah was the villain who orchestrated it all. At Aligarh Muslim University (AMU), his photo ignited similar emotions of anger and hatred, leading to violence. 
Established in 1875, AMU is one of the oldest educational institutions in India. It has been graced with the presence of many stalwarts from the world of the arts and sciences. It’s corridors and classrooms carry the strong whiff of history and legacy. To find such a citadel of learning caught in the eye of the storm is deeply distressing. However, the presence of a portrait of Muhammad Ali Jinnah in the university students’ union office, sharing space with Nehru, Gandhi, and Ambedkar, is bewildering. Why should a hateful, divisive figure, who had been a cause of much suffering in the sub-continent, be accorded that status in AMU? When India gained independence, many statues and busts of Britishers, who only served colonial interests, were removed to make space for Indian freedom fighters. The students’ union should have removed his photo long back. Otherwise, it would seem that AMU had clearly forgotten the horrendous scale of the man-made disaster of 1947. It had become clear to the university authorities that keeping Jinnah’s portrait might lead to an unrest when Lok Sabha MP from Aligarh, Satish Gautam, wrote to the vice-chancellor seeking an explanation. For an outsider, for any Indian, it would appear that AMU glorifies Partition, and hails Jinnah as a hero. Had the university administration acted promptly, it could have saved the institution from violence and embarrassment. Its failure had left 28 students injured and triggered a spate of protests that would further vitiate a communally charged atmosphere. 
An AMU history professor’s justification of the Jinnah portrait – that it reminds one of an undivided India, representing both a tragedy and a promise – will not be music to the ears of millions of Indians who had the misfortune of suffering a gargantuan tragedy. True, it has been at the students’ union office since 1938, but that’s hardly a logic for its continued presence. Jinnah might have been a founder and a generous donor, but the bottom-line is he doesn’t symbolise the values that AMU stands for.  However, it’s also imperative that one condemns the brutishness that the university witnessed as outsiders barged into the campus. The police, it seemed, was caught off guard since it was slow to react. However, by wielding the baton on unarmed students, without exploring the possibility of discussions, the men-in-uniform had crossed a line. Restoring law-and-order doesn’t always necessitate the use of excessive force, even when tempers are high. The law-enforcers needed to exercise restraint.
