In a bid to curb the menace of fake news and rumour mongering on social media, WhatsApp on Friday said that it will set a lower limit of forwarding only five chats at once in India. The company also said that it will remove the 'Quick Forward' button next to media messages.
This comes after the Centre mounted pressure on the social media giant to find some regulation to handle the menace of rumours and fake news on its platform.
"We believe that these changes - which we'll continue to evaluate - will help keep WhatsApp the way it was designed to be: a private messaging app," WhatsApp said in a blog post on Thursday, announcing its worldwide test of limits on forwards.
Violence triggered by incendiary false messages in India, WhatsApp's biggest market with more than 200 million users, has spurred government demands to prevent circulation of false texts and provocative content and caused a public relations nightmare.
False messages about child abductors on WhatsApp have led to mass beatings this year of more than a dozen people in India, some of whom have died.
The latest changes were welcomed by technology experts and security personnel from Jammu and Kashmir.
"Anything which prevents the circulation of fake news and spread of incriminating material is a welcome step. It should be regulated. Some people try to flare up passions over cow slaughter and some incite tempers over pig slaying. It (regulation) should have been done earlier," said Dr Shesh Paul Vaid, Director General of Police, Jammu and Kashmir.
Last weekend police arrested more than 48 people they said were part of a mob that killed a techie in Karnataka after there were WhatsApp rumours that he and a group of friends were child abductors.
Suparno Moitra, an IT expert and former regional director of NASSCOM said that whether this will be of any use will be known after some time. "Social media is used by business houses to connect with consumers and by political parties to send messages to people in general. Unless we develop social responsibility and check over enthusiastic users, the problem will not be solved," he said. "This change is going to make it difficult for people to forward messages, it's going to add a layer of friction to the process," said Nikhil Pahwa, a co-founder of advocacy group Internet Freedom Foundation.
In its first such effort to combat the flurry of fake messages, WhatsApp and the government published advertisements last week in several newspapers aiming to dispel misinformation.
A senior official of the Cyber Crime Cell from Kolkata Police said that it will be treated as curtailment of rights. "A more effective step will be the new feature which lets the user know who the message had been forwarded by" he explained.
Experts said the using social media responsibly is the need of the hour. The Tamil Nadu State Disaster Management Agency has been effectively using WhatsApp groups for relief and rescue operations during natural disasters.
Dr K Sathyagopal, commissioner of Disaster Management and Mitigation Department, Tamil Nadu said that they had made use of social media including WhatsApp for relief and rescue of the people during cyclone Ockhi in November 2017. "We basically use the messaging service to coordinate with the officials. We can switch to other messaging apps if the WhatsApp limits services," he said.

