Counting of votes for Jawahar Lal Nehru Students' Union polls resumed on Saturday evening after being suspended for more than 12 hours as students went on a rampage, vandalising campus property and laying siege of the counting hall on Friday night.
The JNU election committee alleged that some of its members were roughed up and threatened by students, prompting them to suspend the counting.
Violence marred results of Delhi University Students' Union elections too, which were declared on Thursday. Contesting parties clashed after DU EC suspended the counting, citing technical glitches in the Electronic Voting Machines (EVMs).
The counting of votes for JNUSU started around 10 pm on Friday after the two-phase polling finished at 5:30 pm. While DU uses EVMs to vote, JNU still follows ballot papers. According to eye witness' accounts, ABVP leaders went on a rampage after results of councillor seats in science school were announced.
The ABVP lost all seats to independent candidates in what is traditionally considered its bastion, triggering the violent backlash. They jumped the security cordon outside the hall, shoving and pushing security men who tried to prevent them from forcibly entering the counting centre. "They started raising slogans, screaming and shouting at everyone. They demanded that counting be stopped immediately," said Sudhanshu, student of School of Language Literature and Culture Studies.
The students also broke glass windows in the School of International Studies in their bid to barge inside the premises. A security guard was injured in the attack and a girl student was also heckled while she was trying to film it.
As ABVP members laid siege of the counting hall, the EC halted the counting around 4 am. Sources said the contesting candidates, including presidential candidate of United-Left alliance N Sai Balaji, were inside the hall, trying to end the deadlock.
In an official statement released by them, the EC said, "JNUSU counting process, which had begun yesterday (September 14, 2018) at 10 pm has been suspended due to forcibly entering into the counting venue and attempt to snatch away the sealed ballot boxes as well as ballot papers from our counting centres. This was in addition to intimidation and violence towards our Election Committee, including our female members, led by a Presidential and a Joint Secretary candidate."
ABVP-JNU unit president Vijay Kumar claimed that the EC was "biased" towards the Left and the elections were "rigged". "We should be shown each and every ballot paper during counting but the EC went ahead with the process without the presence of a candidate or a counting agent of candidate from our party. This is against the rules," he claimed. The EC panel, meanwhile, said they had called out thrice but when no one from the party turned up, they commenced the process. It also cleared that once the counting is underway, no one can enter or leave the building.
The elections would have been declared null and void if the gridlock had not ended since as per the Lyngdoh guidelines, the results have to be announced within 36 hours of polling. In this eventuality, the university authorities would have appointed a nominated member to represent the students.
