The much-touted 'Bharat Bandh' called by the Congress and supported by 21 parties over rising fuel prices received a lukewarm response on Monday. Barring minor incidents of violence in Pune and Madhya Pradesh, normal life remained unaffected in most metros – Delhi, Mumbai, Ahmedabad, Kolkata, Bengaluru, Jaipur and Chennai.
Schools, colleges, offices and markets remained closed in some places as protesters forcefully shut down petrol pumps and damaged vehicles. A three-year-old girl died in Bihar's Jehanabad district, which the BJP alleged was due to delay in find a vehicle to take her to the hospital. "Everyone has a right to protest but what is happening today. Petrol pumps and buses being set ablaze, putting to risk lives. A child died after an ambulance was stuck in the protests in Bihar's Jehanabad. Who is responsible?" asked Ravi Shankar Prasad, Union Minister and BJP leader. The police said that over 300 Congress functionaries were detained across Gujarat, including state party chief Amit Chavda and Gujarat party in-charge Rajiv Satav from Lal Darwaja area in Ahmedabad. Another 100 protesters were detained in Andhra Pradesh.
The bandh was called by 21 opposition parties led by Congress president Rahul Gandhi. It kickstarted at Rajghat where Gandhi offered holy water from his Kailash Mansarovar yatra.

He then accompanied the Opposition leaders and marched to Ramlila Maidan from Rajghat. "Modiji talked about rising fuel prices. Today, he's quiet. Gas prices have gone from Rs 400 to Rs 800, farmers are commit suicides and BJP MLAs are involved in rape cases, but Modiji is quiet," said Gandhi.
The BJP dubbed the bandh as an attempt to spread rumour and confusion among the masses and said people will "puncture the grand alliance balloon" floated by the weak Opposition. For all the noise they make against the BJP, the Mamata Banerjee-led Trinamool Congress and BJP's sulking ally Shiv Sena steered clear of the Bharat Bandh. The Shiv Sena seems to have a different take on the Bharat Bandh. In the editorial of the party's mouthpiece Saamna, they wrote: "We have been carrying the burden of Opposition leaders so far. We now want to see the strength of the Opposition. People's interests are protected when Opposition parties perform with efficiency."
The Opposition parties that backed the bandh included Samajwadi Party, Bahujan Samaj Party, Nationalist Congress Party, Rashtriya Lok Dal, Rashtriya Janata Dal, Communist Party of India, Communist Party of India (Marxist), Jammu & Kashmir National Conference, Jharkhand Mukti Morcha, Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam, Telugu Desam Party among others. "Few cronies benefit from this government's policies. Ordinary Indians suffer under fuel prices surging every day. Oil price hikes of this order, will raise prices of everything," said CPI (M) leader Sitaram Yechury.
SP chief Akhilesh Yadav said that the BJP government is so proud of itself that even today when the Opposition has called for a 'bandh' they have increased fuel price in some places.
Maharashtra Navnirman Sena workers forcefully shut down shops in Mumbai and in Pune. In Pune, protesters damaged a couple of public transport buses and pelted stones. NCP chief Sharad Pawar said that Opposition parties should make a joint effort to remove this anti-people government. "He (Modi) talked of his government's bravery, but this bravery is in pulling down the rupee. This bravery is in raising fuel prices. This bravery is in raising cooking gas prices," Pawar said.
Several petrol pumps remained closed in Mumbai, Delhi, Kolkata and Bengaluru. The roads wore a deserted look in most metros till noon. However, there was traffic as usual on the main roads. The response to the bandh was mixed as most shops and commercial establishments remained open.
