The anti-Sterlite protest in Tamil Nadu's Thoothukudi district has led to a political slugfest between Chief Minister Edappadi K Palaniswami and DMK working president MK Stalin with former accusing the rival political parties of instigating violence while the latter staged a dharna outside CM's chamber at the Secretariat on the issue.
Breaking his silence on the police firing on the anti-Sterlite protestors, Palaniswami defended the brutal police action saying, "Some anti-social elements intruded into the agitation on May 22 and attacked the police, torched the police vehicles. Under the tense situation, police resorted to firing and the firing was not pre-planned."
Speaking to reporters at the secretariat, chief minister blamed some political parties and anti-social elements for the situation going
"Some political parties and leaders had misguided the agitators against Sterlite. Opposition parties were instigating innocent people to agitate," he said in a series of tweets in response to criticism from various quarters on police firing and violence in which 12 protesters were killed in the last two days. "When someone hits you, you naturally tend to defend yourselves. So on such situations, no one acts in a pre-planned manner," he said.
Palaniswami said that state government continues to respect views of people on Sterlite issue. "Thoothukudi administrators met agitators 14 times about government stand? State government has been taking steps to close down Sterlite plant, through legal means. Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board did not renew the license for Sterlite," he said.
Demanding the resignation of Palaniswami and sacking of DGP TK Rajendran over large-scale arson and violence in Thoothukudi, Stalin who staged a dharna outside CM's chamber was physically removed by the police personnel but he along with party MLAs staged a sit-in at Fort St George complex.
Even after police removed the agitators from the secretariat premises, they continued the protest at Rajaji Salai, right in front of Fort St George. Stalin assailed the chief minister for not visiting the families of the victims of police firing and said the shifting of the district collector and police chief hardly mattered, as it did not amount to any action against them. "The Chief Minister is not bothered about the people. He should immediately resign. Director General of Police T K Rajendran must also be removed or he should resign," Stalin said, adding Congress MLAs made these demands at the BAC meeting and walked out.
"The government is in limbo," he said and demanded a judicial inquiry into the incidents by a sitting judge of the Madras High Court.
The DMK and its allies in Tamil Nadu have called for a dawn-to-dusk bandh on May 25, condemning the police action against protestors in Tuticorin, in which 13 people lost lives in the last three days.

