A group of 25 people vandalised vehicles and public property in Chandlodia on Wednesday night during a protest against the rape of a 14-month-old girl in Sabarkantha district. The protestors belonged to the Thakor community.
The incident took place at around 8.45pm near Radhika park society. The protestors gathered in the area and shouted slogans against migrants. They were heard saying that "people from outside the state shouldn't be allowed to stay in Gujarat if we want the state to be safe".
The protestors then tried to enter the society to look for migrants, but fortunately, they were stopped by a group of women who told them the society didn't have anyone from outside the state.
The group left but returned after a while armed with stones and sticks, and started vandalising the vehicles parked inside the society. Windows of four vehicle were shattered and two bikes were damaged in the incident.
After the incident, the Ahmedabad police control room was contacted for help and teams from Sola and Ghatlodia police stations were rushed to the spot to bring the situation under control. Around 200 police officers including DCP, ACP and PI-level officers were deployed.
Inspector DH Gadhvi, Sola police station, said: "We have been able to nab around 10 people and lodged a case of rioting against 25. We are trying to recover CCTV footage from the nearby area to identify the rest. Fortunately, no casualty took place in the incident, only some vehicles were damaged."
Following the violence, several police officials were deployed in sensitive areas of the city including Chandlodia.
Several incidents of protests against migrants have been reported from across the state in the past two days. The protests were triggered by the revelation that the accused in the rape case was a migrant worker from Bihar. Protests were held in Gandhinagar, Mehsana, Sabarkantha, Ahmedabad and Aravalli, and many people were detained for damaging public property.
On September 28, a 14-month-old girl was raped by a labourer in Sabarkantha. The accused identified as Ravindra (a native of Bihar) was later arrested by the police. The baby underwent treatment at the Civil hospital of Ahmedabad, and is now believed to be out of danger.
