Minor violence, ruckus and loud protests marred the counting of Delhi University Students' Union (DUSU) polls on Thursday. The election committee suspended counting of votes for more than three hours in the afternoon following the chaos. It was later resumed around 5:30 in the evening.
High drama was witnessed outside Community Hall, Kingsway Camp where the counting started around 8:30 in the morning. Party supporters, contesting candidates from arch-rivals NSUI and ABVP clashed on the campus in the afternoon after the officials announced that counting has been suspended following technical glitches in as many as six Electronic Voting Machines (EVM). The arena outside community hall soon turned into a battleground with NSUI and ABVP supporters running amok. Sudhir Dedha, the secretarial candidate from the RSS-backed ABVP allegedly tried to enter the premises by breaking a glass door while NSUI workers reportedly broke windowpanes of the hall.
Security was beefed up and more force added to the over 100 police personnel who were on duty at Kingsway Camp since morning. Approximately 200 police personnel including women barricaded the hall, turning it into a fortress. However, irked students, including members of new alliance AISA-CYSS tried to jump the barricades and enter the cordoned off counting centre. Scores of students claiming allegiance to different candidates and parties resorted to sloganeering in front of the counting centre even as cops tried to control the situation. NSUI demanded re-elections while ABVP pressed for counting to resume. Following the brawl, chief election officer VK Kaul announced that they have halted the counting for the day and will take a decision on it only in the evening.
Before the technical glitches were reported, NSUI's Sunny Chhillar was leading on the president's seat while Shakti Singh of ABVP was the front-runner for secretary. For joint secretary, AISA-CYSS candidate Sunny Tanwar was leading.
NSUI, meanwhile, alleged that since they were winning the top three seats, the EVMs were declared erroneous to favour the ABVP. Fairoz Khan, alleging tampering with the machines said, "This is a violent murder of democracy by ABVP. They have butchered the democratic values." ABVP's Singh, however, countered the accusations saying, "Only one EVM showed error and it can be repaired. We want the counting to be resumed. Since we were leading on all the seats, the other parties are demanding fresh elections."
Security was beefed up even as over 100 policemen were on duty. Around 200 police personnel, including women, barricaded the hall. However, irked students, including members of AISA-CYSS tried to jump barricades and enter the cordoned off counting centre
