Social media platform WhatsApp on Wednesday said false news, misinformation and spread of hoax messages are issues that need to be dealt collectively with government, civil society and technology companies together. This is in response to the Ministry of IT and Communications warning WhatsApp on Tuesday over spread of misinformation messages on its platform which has led to many incidents of lynching across the country. The government asked WhatsApp to take immediate measures to prevent the spread of irresponsible and explosive messages.
Minister of IT and Electronics Ravi Shankar Prasad said greater accountability from social media firms is required.
One has to find technological solutions to identify mass-circulation of messages on a particular issue in a particular area, he added. "WhatsApp should work in a coordinated manner with IT Department, Home Ministry and the police," he said. "If in any state, any part, on a particular subject if there is a movement of large volumes of messages on WhatsApp it is not rocket science that can't be discovered by application of technology," Prasad said.
Prasad said that social media companies like WhatsApp that are reaping commercial gains from India's market have to remain accountable and vigilant to prevent abuse of their platforms for spread of dangerous and provocative messages.
WhatsApp in its response to the ministry said it was horrified by the terrible acts of violence. "WhatsApp cares deeply about people's safety, which is why we designed our app with security in mind," it said. It recently added new features to its platform which prevented users from re-adding former members of messaging groups and has enabled group administrators to decide who can send messages. It is also testing labelling of forwarded messages.
WhatsApp has over 200 million users in India. It also plans to run long-term public safety advertising campaigns. "As a starting point, we will soon publish new educational materials around misinformation and conduct our news literacy workshops." The firm said it follows a two-pronged approach that includes giving people controls and information they need to stay safe, and working proactively to prevent misuse on WhatsApp. "We also respond to valid law enforcement requests to help them investigate crimes. And soon, we will start an engagement program with law enforcement officials around India so they are familiar with our approach and how we can be helpful."
WhatsApp has over 200 million users in India. It plans to run long-term public safety advertising campaigns 
In the last one year, 31 people have been killed across the country after false rumours were floated on social media
