A Group of Ministers (GoM) headed by Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh will submit a report to Prime Minister Narendra Modi on legal framework to stop growing mob lynching cases across the country, the government said on Monday.
The GoM has been set up to study recommendations that a committee chaired by Union Home Secretary Rajiv Gauba will submit in four months. Modi said in Parliament on Friday that any incident of violence brings shame to the nation.
External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj, Road Transport Minister Nitin Gadkari, Law Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad and Social Justice and Empowerment Minister Thawar Chand Gehlot are members of the GoM.
The secretaries of justice, legal affairs, legislative, besides social justice and empowerment departments are members of the committee that will give its report to the GoM.
The move comes after the Supreme Court asked Parliament last week to consider enacting a law to deal with cases of lynching and cow vigilantism.
It also came on a day the government and the Opposition bitterly fought each other over a man's lynching in Rajasthan's Alwar last week.
"State governments have been advised to implement the directions issued by the Supreme Court," a Home Ministry statement said on Monday.
"The government is concerned at the incidents of violence by mobs in some parts of the country. The government has already condemned such incidents and made its stand clear in Parliament that it is committed to upholding the rule of law and adopting effective measures to curb such incidents," the statement said.
Union Minister Jayant Sinha had to express regret on July 11 over his act of felicitating eight people convicted of lynching a man in Jharkhand last year. On July 6, a photo went viral in which Sinha was seen garlanding the men, who had come out on bail then. Sinha's act received criticism not only from the Opposition but also from his father and former Finance Minister Yashwant Sinha.
The government asked the states and Union Territories (UTs) on July 5 to stop mob-lynching cases triggered by child-lifting rumours on social media.
More than 20 people have been killed over the last two months on suspicion of child lifting. In the latest case, five men were killed in Maharashtra's Dhule on July 1.
On July 3, the Supreme Court said that states are under obligation to prevent lynchings and mob violence. That court said whether there is a law or not [against lynching], nobody should be allowed to take law into their hands.
