After an informal summit with Chinese President Xi Jinping in Wuhan, Prime Minister Narendra Modi is making another bout of a robust diplomatic outreach in the neighbourhood. The Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) on Thursday announced that Modi will travel to Nepal for a two-day visit on May 11. A day earlier, on May 10, External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj will visit Myanmar to hold talks on bilateral and regional issues, including the situation in the Rakhine state from where thousands of Rohingya Muslims had fled violence last year. PM Modi is also expected to receive Bangladesh Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina in Shantiniketan (West Bengal). Both leaders will inaugurate Bangladesh Bhawan at the Vishwa Bharti complex later this month.
Modi's Nepal visit holds considerable significance, as it is aimed at maintaining the momentum in bilateral ties following Nepal PM K P Oli's India trip early in April. The neighbourhood outreach is seen as Modi's another bid to push the Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (Bimstec). The seven-member Bimstec leaders — including Bangladesh, India, Myanmar, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Bhutan and Nepal — are scheduled to meet in Kathmandu in June or July. The Modi government is keen to develop this forum as an alternative to South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) to isolate Pakistan.
Swaraj will also hold talks with the top leadership of Myanmar on May 10. Both sides are expected to ink several key agreements covering diverse aspects of the bilateral relationship, External Affairs Ministry spokesperson Raveesh Kumar said. He said both sides were also expected to review the progress made on decisions taken during Prime Minister's visit to Myanmar in September 2017. Myanmar is one of India's strategic neighbours and shares a 1,640-km border with a number of northeastern states, including militancy-hit Nagaland and Manipur.
On the Rohingya issue, the MEA spokesperson said India has been maintaining that normalcy would return to the Rakhine state with the return of displaced persons. He said India is also of the view that long-term solution to the problem in the Rakhine state would be to ensure its socio-economic development. An estimated 6,00,000 Rohingya Muslims had fled Myanmar's Rakhine state since August last year after large-scale violence there. In December last, India had announced a development assistance of $25 million for the Rakhine state. Ahead of her visit, Swaraj will chair an Interactive Session on the Act East Policy here on Friday. The session will be attended by chief ministers of the eight North Eastern States along with senior Central government officials.

