Curfew was imposed in Malpura area of Tonk district on Friday as fresh violence erupted a day after locals pelted stones at kanwariyas. Internet services too have been suspended temporarily to control rumour-mongering.
On Thursday, members of the minority community had allegedly pelted stones at a kawad yatra, resulting in injuries to a dozen men. The situation in the town worsened as the mob resorted to arson and set fire to some shops. Initially the police faced difficulty in handling the situation. Inspector General of Ajmer range Biju George Joseph reached the town with additional force. 
While prohibitory orders (Section 144) had been imposed after Thursday’s incident, and additional forces had been deployed, a fresh clash between the cops and an unruly mob occurred on Friday afternoon. 
“Without any provocation a few men started pelting stones at the cops deployed in the area. Their numbers soon swelled and some of the men set a shop ablaze. However, they were dealt with swiftly and as the force charged at them, they broke away and fled from the spot,” officials said.
Meanwhile, taking into consideration the situation in the town, Tonk collector Ramchandra Denwal imposed curfew. “Prohibitory orders had been issued on Thursday wherein an assembly of four people or more was prohibited. Considering the fresh development in the matter, the curfew has been imposed,” officials said.
Meanwhile, the cops are now trying to piece together as to how the incident occurred and are also trying to identify the perpetrators.
Notably, days after a kawad yatra was attacked in Sikar, another similar incident occurred on Thursday wherein members from the minority community armed with sticks and sharp weapons attacked a kawad yatra in Tonk district causing injuries to a dozen individuals. 
So fierce was their attack that even the cops accompanying the yatra for management had to run away to save themselves. The mob torched car and damaged a roadways bus while also manhandling its driver. Tonk Superintendent of Police (SP) rushed to the spot with other officials and additional forces to handle the situation.
On Thursday, members of the minority community had pelted stones at a kawad yatra, resulting in injuries to a dozen men. The situation in the town worsened as the mob set on fire some shops and also took to stone pelting on Friday. Initially the police faced difficulty in handling the situation.
