A day after violence erupted in Chakan during Maratha agitation, Pune rural police claimed that the persons restored to violence were not a part of the Maratha 'Morcha' but they were anti-social elements.
Police have registered a case against nearly 5,000 unidentified persons in connection with the Monday's violence.
Police are also suspecting that the violence was a pre-planned conspiracy. A senior police officer who is part of the investigation said, "The preliminary investigation has revealed that the miscreants were equipped with inflammatory materials with the help of which they set vehicles on fire. They were also carrying some sharp weapons which suggest that the violence was a pre-planned conspiracy."
The case in regards to the Chakan violence which involved torching and damaging of nearly 60 vehicles and also attacks on police personnel were registered in Chakan police station on Tuesday.
The vehicles which were damaged include state transport buses from Maharashtra and Gujarat. The total estimate of the financial loss of the properties is around Rs 8 to Rs 10 crore. 
Police have included relevant sections of Highway Act, Green Tribunal Act and Public Property damage Act along with the sections of Indian Penal Code (IPC).
Police are now trying to identify the miscreants with the help of available video footage of the violence.
"We have got some footage from the nearby CCTVs and with its help we now trying to identify the miscreants. So far we have managed to identify 25 to 30 persons and some of them are from city areas of Pune and Pimpri Chinchwad while others are local," the police officer said. 
The violence had erupted on Monday afternoon when the members of Maratha community had organised a rally in Chakan area in support of the ongoing Maratha quota agitation. However, police have claimed that the persons involved in the violence were not from the Maratha rally.
Superintendent of police (Pune Rural) Sandeep Patil said, "The rally was carried out in Chakan on Monday morning and it went on peacefully till 12.30 pm. It was only when some anti-social elements who were not from the rally restored to stone pelting and torching of vehicles, the situation became violent."
Patil also stated that the mob which went on rampage was large in number and the police force was inadequate to control the mob. It was only when additional force was sent to the affected areas, the situation was brought under control. 
On Tuesday, a day after the violence the area of Chakan was relatively peaceful. Many shops and offices were operational but some schools, colleges were closed for precautionary measures. 
Meanwhile, the members of Maratha Kranti Morcha have also come out to condemn the violence.
Rajendra Kondhare, conveyor of MKM said, "We condemned the Chakan violence and we are clarifying that none of the members of the Maratha community participating in the rally were involved in it. We are ready to cooperate with the police in their investigation. We are also repeatedly appealing to the Maratha community not to take law into their hands."
