It was an emotional adieu to the iron man of Kashmir journalism. A sea of people descended on the picturesque hamlet of Kreeri to join the final journey of the veteran journalist and editor-in-chief of The Rising Kashmir, Shujaat Bukhari. Bukhari was brutally assassinated along with two personal security officers (PSOs) outside his office at Mushtaq Enclave, Press Colony in Srinagar on Thursday.
Amid cries and wails, Bukhari was laid to rest at his ancestral graveyard at Kreeri on Friday morning. Thousands of people participated in the Namaz-e-Jinaza (Pre Burial prayers) at the local grounds here.
Leaders cutting across the political and ideological divide attended the funeral service. From former chief minister Omar Abdullah to J&K Finance minister Altaf Bukhari to CPIM leader MY Tarigami, hundreds of leaders joined the funeral.
Scores of journalists, police officers and bureaucrats paid their final respects to the fearless scribe. Every eye became moist when Bukhari's minor son shouldered his father's coffin to the graveyard. "At Bukhari's funeral today, I realised that life has come to a dead end in Kashmir. We are now nothing but a large crowd of numb mourners going from house to house and graveyard to graveyard, each one of us waiting for our turn to die," tweeted Shah Feasal, the 2010 IAS topper, who is currently managing director of J&K State Power Development Corporation.
Several journalists from local, national and international publications condemned Bukhari's killing. The local journalists' unions have urged the state to bring the perpetrators to justice. The Kashmir Journalists Corps (KJC) has termed the killing of Shujaat as an attack on the entire media fraternity of Kashmir. "Many of our colleagues have fallen to the bullets of assassins in the last 28 years of turmoil. Yet, there is no end to the violence against mediapersons who are working in toughest conditions. Bukhari's killing is a grim reminder of the violence perpetuated against the small media fraternity of Kashmir," said a chief spokesman of KJC.
Living up to Bukhari's style of functioning that 'the show must go on', the editorial team of Rising Kashmir came out with an edition on Friday. Selected articles of Bukhari were also carried in Friday's edition as a tribute to the senior journalist.
