Stating that violence has no place in the society, President Ram Nath Kovind on Tuesday pleaded that contentious issues and extraneous debates should not be allowed to distract the country which was at the cusp of achieving many long-awaited goals.
In the backdrop of incidents of lynching and communal conflagrations in some parts of the country, President Kovind, in his televised address to the nation on the eve of the Independence Day, recalled Mahatma Gandhi's "most noble mantra" on the power of 'ahimsa' (non-violence) being far greater than the power of 'hinsa' (violence). Kovind descibed described Gandhi as India's moral compass.
He also said that since the Independence Day is so close to his150th anniversary, there was need to adapt his ideas and maxims, that included 'swachhta' (cleanliness) and the concept of 'swadeshi' for economy, health, education social aspirations and policy choices. He also urged university students to spend a few days every year — in a village, terming it "University Social Responsibility". "It will be of benefit to the individual student and to the village, as well as to the country. It will also invoke the fervour of our freedom struggle, and the identification of every citizen with the national mission," he said.
Touching upon a range of issues, Kovind also said women were entitled to a life of their choice to fulfil their potential.
He said that every Indian who does not jump the queue and respects the civic space and rights of those ahead in the line lives up to the principles of the country's freedom struggle. "It's a very small gesture. Let us try and abide by it," Kovind said.
Highlighting the role of farmers in providing food security to fellow citizens and the contribution by the country's armed and police forces in battling terrorism, he said, "Every Indian who does his or her job with sincerity and commitment is upholding the principles of our freedom struggle."
He said the decisions the country takes today, the foundations we lay, the projects we undertake, the social and economic investments we make today whether for the immediate future or for the medium term will determine where we stand.
"The pace of change and development in our country is rapid and appreciable. It is driven by our people, by civil society and by a partnership between citizen and government. Its focus, again in keeping with the essence of Indian thought, is on a better life for the less fortunate," President Kovind said.
The President said that every Indian who does his or her job with sincerity and commitment, who contributes to society by being true to a professional ethic, be it the doctor's ethic, the nurse's ethic, the teacher's ethic, the public servant's ethic, the factory worker's ethic, the business-person's ethic, the ethic of those who have to care for ageing parents who brought them up with love and sacrifice -each of these and many others are in their own way upholding the values of freedom.
